Coolblue should have had explicit permission from visitors to collect personal data via cookies. This means that people must actively choose to do so. This was not the case at Coolblue. In the cookie statement, the company indicated that it assumed that visitors agreed. In addition, Coolblue had pre-checked the boxes for permission to use cookies. This is in violation of the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR). Opportunity to put things in order At the end of 2019, the AP started an investigation into websites, including Coolblue.nl, to test whether they complied with the rules that apply to cookies. The AP examined whether those websites requested permission correctly. After a visit to Coolblue.nl, the AP sent Coolblue a letter in November 2019, because the company did not have its policy in this area in order. In April and May 2020, the AP found that Coolblue's working methods were still not in order. The AP then started an investigation. In June 2020 it turned out that Coolblue had already adjusted its working methods. AP checks cookies more oftenMany people are annoyed by websites that use cookies without permission, or misleading cookie banners that make it very difficult for visitors to say 'no'. Since 2024, the AP has been checking extra whether websites ask permission for cookies in the correct manner.Rules of thumb for clear cookie bannersIn addition to extra enforcement of the rules, the AP provides more information about cookie banners. To help organizations comply with the law, the AP has drawn up a number of rules of thumb, with clear examples of what should and should not be done.Information campaignFinally, the AP has started a 'cookie campaign'. With this campaign, the AP calls on organizations to examine their cookie policy. The AP also wants to use this campaign to make people aware of the impact that cookies have on their privacy. The AP website contains a lot of information about cookies and the measures people can take to protect their privacy against cookies.
