10,000 euros in damages for violation of the GDPR right to information

The Oldenburg labor court has sentenced a company to pay a former employee non-material damages of EUR 10,000 under Art. 82 GDPR because it did not comply with a right to information under Art. 15 (1) GDPR. The violation of the GDPR itself leads to immaterial damage to be compensated, a more detailed description of the damage is not necessary.

Dispute about immaterial damages from Art. 82 Para. 1 DS-GVO The plaintiff demanded from his former employer, a company for fireworks, where he was first employed as managing director and later as sales manager, information according to Art. 15 Para. 1 DS -GVO about personal data processed by the company and relating to him as well as a copy of the data in accordance with Art. 15 Para. 3 DS-GVO. The employer refused to provide the information. It was only about 20 months later that she presented individual documents in the process. In addition to the information from Art. 82 (1) GDPR, the plaintiff therefore asserted a claim for immaterial damages in the amount of EUR 500 per month for the period of non-compliance with the obligation to provide information. ArbG: standard has a preventive character Amount of 10,000 euros awarded. The defendant should have fulfilled its obligation to provide information pursuant to Art. 12 (3) GDPR within one month. She didn't comply. The plaintiff did not have to explain the damage in more detail. Even the violation of the GDPR itself leads to immaterial damage to be compensated. According to the ArbG, citing the Federal Labor Court (BeckRS 2021, 29622 and BeckRS 2022, 20229). In contrast to the BAG, which considered damages of 1,000 euros to be sufficient in the case there, the ArbG considers damages of 10,000 euros here due to a significantly higher interest in information on the part of the plaintiff (comprehensive information versus information limited to work records) and the long period of non-fulfillment of the Duty to provide information justified.

on ArbG Oldenburg, judgment of February 9th, 2023 - 3 Ca 150/21 Editor beck-aktuell, March 14th, 2023.

Related Links

From the database beck-onlineArbG Berlin, immaterial damages according to Art. 82 DS-GVO because of violation of the right to information in the employment relationship, ZD 2023, 165 Leibold, damages according to Art. 82 DS-GVO because of incorrect or late information - overview of the current case law, ZD-Aktuell 2022, 01092BAG, Amount of the claim for immaterial damages in the event of a violation of GDPR, NJW 2022, 2779LG Cologne, No damages according to GDPR without damage, GRUR-RS 2022, 3541BAG, Processing of health data in the employment relationship, BeckRS 2021, 29622LAG Berlin-Brandenburg, damages for breach of the right to information under the GDPR, BeckRS 2021, 47685ArbG Neumünster, damages for late provision of information, ZD 2021, 171Korch, damages for data protection violations, NJW 2021, 978Paal/Aliprandi, immaterial damages for data protection violations, ZD 2021, 241
