The National Supervisory Authority completed an investigation at the operator Qualitance QBS SA and found the violation of the provisions of art. 32 of the General Data Protection Regulation. 
The operator Qualitance QBS SA was sanctioned with a fine in the amount of 4,867.50 lei (equivalent to 1,000 EURO). 
The investigation was initiated following the receipt of complaints claiming that the operator had sent an e-mail to 295 persons (candidates who provided their personal data for recruitment on the operator's website or through online applications line), thus revealing the e-mail addresses of the other recipients. During the investigation, the National Supervisory Authority found that the operator did not implement sufficient security measures to ensure the confidentiality of the personal data of data subjects, which led to the disclosure of e-mail addresses belonging to 295 persons to other recipients, contrary to the obligations provided by art. 32 of the RGPD. In this sense, art. 32 also stipulates the obligation of the operator to implement appropriate technical and organizational measures, including the ability to ensure the confidentiality, integrity, availability and ongoing resilience of processing systems and services.
Qualitance QBS SA was also applied the corrective measure to ensure the compliance of personal data processing operations with the General Data Protection Regulation, by implementing appropriate technical and organizational measures in case of remote transmission of personal data, including regular training of data controllers under its authority (employees or collaborators). 

Legal and Communication Department 
ANSPDCP
