Two administrative fines of 370,000 euros imposed

HEP-Toplinarstvo fined 320,000 euros

The Personal Data Protection Agency imposed an administrative fine of 320,000 euros on HEP-Toplinarstvo as the controller for violating the provisions of the General Data Protection Regulation, specifically for failing to take appropriate technical and organizational protection measures when processing personal data and for failing to cooperate with the Agency, whereby HEP-Toplinarstvo did not provide access to information necessary for the performance of the Agency's tasks.

The Agency received a report from a respondent that when requesting a change of a forgotten password on the HEP-Toplinarstvo "My Account" portal, the user is sent a temporary password by e-mail, which is actually the last password set by the user. During the supervisory procedure, it was determined that when creating the conceptual design of the "My Account" application, a method of changing a forgotten password was established so that the user is sent the same password that is entered in the application database for that user (and which the user set himself) to his email as a temporary password, and that all passwords of users of the "My Account" portal (almost 16,000 of them) are stored in the database of the controller in readable form. Considering the above, since user passwords are stored in the database of the controller in readable form, the personal data of users of the "My Account" application are exposed to the risk of unauthorized disclosure and misuse, which, according to Article 32, paragraph 2 of the General Data Protection Regulation, represents one of the key security risks that the controller was obliged to previously assess and combat by taking appropriate personal data security measures. However, the controller consciously chose a solution that did not include basic data protection security measures, such as generating a temporary password or using data encryption methods, did not take into account the risks to the security of personal data, nor did it conduct a risk assessment of the processing of users' personal data.

During the procedure, the controller did not demonstrate an appropriate level of cooperation to eliminate the breach and mitigate the possible harmful effects. Also, the controller did not provide the Agency with evidence of changes to the functionality of the application, nor did it take measures to mitigate the possible harmful effects of the breach of Article 32 of the General Data Protection Regulation after learning about the security breach, such as informing the data subjects.

Finally, during the supervisory procedure, the controller did not provide the Agency with access to all information necessary to perform its tasks. Such conduct constitutes non-cooperation with the Agency as a supervisory authority, which is contrary to Article 31 of the General Data Protection Regulation.

Otherwise, in 2025, the Agency imposed twelve administrative fines, bringing the total amount of fines imposed this year to 900,500.00 euros.
