Job seekers can register with APG\* if they are interested in mediation by this recruitment agency. People can of course also request that their personal data be deleted, for example if they no longer want mediation. But that did not go well for several people. Names, home addresses, e-mail addresses, telephone numbers, dates of birth and CVs containing information about education and work experience remained in the APG database after the persons requested their removal. APG also approached these people about vacancies. Right to oblivionPeople have the right to be forgotten. This means that in many cases an organization must delete someone's data if that person so requests. So that people's privacy is protected. Organizations must also do their best not to collect and store more personal data than necessary. If there is no good reason to retain and use personal data any longer, it is important that the organization deletes that data. Because information that an organization does not have cannot create a privacy problem. This data minimization is a starting point of the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR). Method adjusted After an investigation by the AP, it turned out that APG did have a method for requests to delete data. Yet in practice things went wrong a number of times. APG has examined its internal policy and adjusted a number of points. The AP took this into account when determining the fine amount. Procedure for publication of fine The AP imposed the fine on APG in 2020. The AP may now make this decision public, after APG had initiated proceedings regarding the fine and its publication.\*APG now operates under a different name: The Ambitious Group.
