In connection with the publication of a "black list" of teachers from Varna educational institutions supporting a petition against the implementation of the latest amendments and supplements to the Preschool and School Education Act
10.03.2025

In connection with information published in the media about a violation of the rules for the protection of personal data by publishing on the page of the "Vazrazhdane - Varna" profile on the social media Facebook a "black list" of teachers from Varna educational institutions supporting a petition against the implementation of the latest amendments and supplements to the Preschool and School Education Act (PSEA) and a similar signal received, the Commission for Personal Data Protection (CPDP) has taken action to conduct an investigation into the case.

After actions were taken to establish facts and circumstances in the case, official inquiries were made on the Internet regarding publications concerning the organization of a petition against the implementation of the latest amendments and supplements to the ZPUO and the preparation of lists of persons supporting it, as well as statements were requested from the affected persons.

It has been established that in the media space in August 2024, 3 petitions were organized against the implementation of the latest amendments and supplements to the ZPUO (2 petitions organized by Boris Iliev - a lecturer at the National School of Natural Sciences and Mathematics "Acad. Lyubomir Chakalov", Sofia and 1 open letter organized by Stanimir Panayotov and Stoyo Tetevenski). The petitions are directed to different categories of individuals:

– lecturers, scientists, doctoral students and employees in the Bulgarian higher education and scientific system;

– pedagogical specialists from various educational institutions in the Republic of Bulgaria and

– teachers and parents.

It is evident from the content of the signatures that the persons who provide their personal data in their support explicitly agree or not to have their data published in full or with initials only, which is why the processing of their data is lawful and in accordance with Article 6, §1, letter "a" of Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council.

It has been established that electronic media are also disseminating information that the organization of the PP "Vazrazhdane" in the city of Varna has published a list with the names, subjects taught and jobs of teachers and school principals from the city of Varna who have signed a list against the legal ban on LGBT propaganda in schools and kindergartens, aimed at informing parents about what kind of teachers teach their children. And on his Facebook profile, Kostadin Kostadinov announces that "Vazrazhdane" will file a report with the prosecutor's office on this occasion. From the media publications it was established that the distributed short list contains two names, place of work and subject taught of a total of 26 persons working in Varna schools, a school and an educational center.

In their statement, the PP "Vazrazhdane" indicates that on 18.08.2024 the municipal organization of the PP "Vazrazhdane" in the city of Varna received access to the public list from the Facebook page of the initiator of the petition Boris Iliev, where the link for free download was also published. The names cited in the short list are part of the list prepared and published in the above-mentioned petitions, and all the above-mentioned access links were duly published on the Vazrazhdane-Varna page.

In the light of the factual situation thus clarified and from the written evidence collected, it has been established that the list disseminated in the media, containing 26 teachers and employees in Varna educational institutions as categories of individuals (teachers) and categories of personal data (2 names, position and workplace) coincides in structure with that of the Signature "Position of Bulgarian Teachers against the Amendments to Art. 11 of the Preschool and School Education Act", initiated by Boris Iliev. It has also been established that the data of 25 out of a total of 26 persons from the "black list" are present in the signature initiated by Boris Iliev. The persons who provided their personal data in support of the signatures have voluntarily entered their data in them and have expressly consented to their data being made public, therefore the processing of their data appears to be lawful and in accordance with Art. 6, §1, letter "a" of Regulation (EU) 2016/679.
