The Danish Data Protection Agency has set PrivatBo AMBA of 1993 a fine of DKK 150,000 after passing on tenants' confidential information.

In 2018, PrivatBo - as a management company - assisted a housing fund with an intended sale of three properties. On that occasion, PrivatBo provided material for the properties in question, which was distributed to the occupants of the properties in question on a total of 424 USB keys. However, PrivatBo was not aware that for some of the leases handed out, documents were attached which contained personal data of a confidential nature and which should not have been disclosed.

“In a case like the one in question, it is our assessment that PrivatBo should at least have reviewed the offer material before it was handed out to others. In this connection, we pay particular attention to the fact that there was a risk of passing on information of a confidential nature to e.g. neighbors, and that this could involve significant discomfort for the tenants in question, including for loss of reputation, ”says Frederik Viksøe Siegumfeldt, office manager for the supervisory unit in the Danish Data Protection Agency, and adds:

“In general, when you as a company process people's personal information, you also have a responsibility to ensure that it does not come to the knowledge of unauthorized persons. In this case, we do not believe that PrivatBo has done enough to prevent the personal information from being passed on. ”

The Danish Data Protection Agency has thus assessed that PrivatBo has not complied with the requirements of Article 32 of the Data Protection Regulation to implement appropriate technical and organizational security measures. Based on the nature of the case, the Authority has therefore chosen to report PrivatBo to the police for the unintentional disclosure of personal information that took place as part of the handing over of the 424 USB keys.

In addition, the Danish Data Protection Agency has found grounds for expressing serious criticism that PrivatBo subsequently - in connection with the same offer obligation - unintentionally handed over an overview of outstanding deposits and prepaid rent, and in some cases information about outlays in deposits, distributed to the tenants' address to residents in a property other than that which was subject to the tender obligation in question. The unintentional disclosure of this information occurred despite the fact that PrivatBo had hired an external auditing company in order to ensure the quality of the material.
