Page 1
(7)
ADMINISTRATIVE FOD Target

COURT IN STOCKHOLM 2024-07-17 No
Section 7 Notified in Stockholm 6034-24

THE COMPLAINANT
Dr Complainant

PARTNER
The Authority for the Protection of Privacy

APPEALED DECISION

Decision of the Data Protection Authority 2024-03-19

THE CASE
Processing of personal data

DECISION OF THE ADMINISTRATIVE COURT

The Administrative Court rejects the appeal.
Visiting address Opening hours Postal address E-mail address
o Tegeluddsvägen 1 Monday-Friday avd7.fst@dom.se
D Page 1
08:00-16:00 115 76 Stockholm
Phone number Website (7)
08-561 680 00 www.domstol.se/forvaltningsratten-i-
stockholm/ Page 2

ADMINISTRATIVE DOM 6034-24
COURT IN STOCKHOLM

APPEALS ETC.

Dr Complainant has lodged a complaint against Region Uppsala with the

Swedish Authority for Privacy Protection (IMY), essentially alleging that the
Region is recording telephone conversations without a legal basis for the

processing.

The IMY decided on 19 March 2024 to send an information letter to the

Region informing it, interalia,of the applicable law and to close the complaint
case without taking any further action. The reasons for the decision were

essentially as follows. IMY is required to deal with complaints and, where

appropriate, to investigate the substance of the complaint. The purpose of

sending information about the complaint and the applicable rules is to give
the region an opportunity to review its own processing of personal data and to

correct any shortcomings. In view of the above, IMY does not find grounds to

investigate the complaint further.

Dr Complainant requests that IMY initiate supervision under the EU Data

Protection Regulation and argues, interalia,the following. The supervisory

authority shall investigate with due diligence complaints lodged by an

individual who considers that the processing of personal data relating to him

or her constitutes a
breach of the General Data Protection Regulation. The supervisory authority

also has an obligation to take effective measures to curb infringements. It is

therefore not true that IMY has the same scope as other Swedish

supervisory authorities to decide which supervisory cases to pursue and how
to do so. According to the case law of the Court of Justice of the European

Union, the supervisory authority must first determine whether therehas been a

breach of the rules and, if so, take appropriate measures to remedy the

identified deficiency. In this case, the information letter has preceded the

investigation that would have formed the basis for sending the letter. The
information letter also ends with the information that

1Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council of27 April 2016 on

Doc.Id 1771278 Page 3
theprotection of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free
movement of such data, and repealing Directive 95/46/EC (General Data Protection
Regulation).

Doc.Id 1771278 Page 4

ADMINISTRATIVE DOM 6034-24
COURT IN STOCKHOLM

IMY does not intend to take further action and there is thus no incentive for the

controller to remedy its legal infringements. IMY has therefore failed to

investigate the matter with due diligence and to take a decision to remedy the
identified deficiency, despite the fact that it is clear from the documents it has

submitted that the Region has not been able to provide a legal basis for its

processing of personal data.

He does not question that in some cases a matter can be resolved by an

information letter. However, this concerns issues where the controller's

behaviour is due to ignorance or misunderstanding, which the region can
hardly hide behind in this case. Furthermore, information letters are not a

corrective measure under Article 58 of the GDPR and therefore cannot

constitute an effective measure within IMY's discretionary range of
appropriate measures. In addition, IMY does not follow the internal guidance

established by the European Data Protection Board regarding the content of an

information letter. For example, there is no call for the controller to comply

with the law or information on how to make such a correction. The guidance
also refers to the IMY's task of monitoring and enforcing the application of the

GDPR. It is highly questionable whether the authority fulfils that mission

when it does not take a position on complaints. It is not he as a rights holder

who should be responsible for ensuring that the controller or the supervisory
authority does what is required of them.

IMY considers that the appeal should be rejected and states, inter alia, the
following. IMY has not taken a position on whether the personal data

processing in question fulfils the provisions of the Data Protection Regulation,

but has sent an information letter informing the region of the complaint and the

applicable rules on the matter. The purpose of sending an information letter is
to give the person against whom the case is directed an opportunity to review

their processing of personal data and correct any shortcomings. In case the

information letter does not have the intended effect, it states

Doc.Id 1771278 Page 5

ADMINISTRATIVE DOM 6034-24
COURT IN STOCKHOLM

the complainant was free to submit a new complaint at a later stage. IMY has

considered this measure to be sufficient and has closed the case.

THE REASONS FOR THE DECISION

Applicable provisions

According to Article 77(1) of the GDPR, a data subject who considers that the processing

of personal data relating to him or her infringes the GDPR has the right to lodge a

complaint with a supervisory authority.
Article 57(1)(f) of the Regulation requires the supervisory authority to examine

the complaint lodged by a data subject and, where appropriate, to investigate

the substance of the complaint.

Recital 141 of the Regulation states that, subject to possible judicial

review, the investigation of complaints should be carried out to the

extent appropriate in the individual case.

Recital 129 of the Regulation further states, inter alia, that The powers of the

supervisory authorities should be exercised impartially, fairly and within a

reasonable time, in accordance with the appropriate procedural safeguards laid
down in Union and Member State law. In particular, any measure should be

appropriate, necessary and proportionate to ensure compliance with this

Regulation, taking into account the circumstances of each case, respecting the
right of every person to be heard before any individual measure adversely

affecting him or her is taken, and designed to avoid unnecessary costs and

excessive inconvenience for the persons concerned.

The Court of Justice of the European Union has stated that the supervisory

authority must investigate complaints with due diligence, choose a necessary

and appropriate measure, and ensure full compliance with the Regulation
(judgement of the Court of Justice of the European Union in Case C-311/18,

Facebook

Doc.Id 1771278 Page 6

ADMINISTRATIVE DOM 6034-24
COURT IN STOCKHOLM

Ireland and Schrems, EU:C:2020:559, paragraphs 109 and 112). According to

the CJEU, the supervisory authority also has a discretion as to the choice of

appropriate and necessary measures (judgments of the CJEU in Joined Cases
C-26/22 and C-64/22 UF and AB v Land Hessen and SCHUFA Holding AG,

EU:C:2023:958, paragraphs 57 and 68-69).

In connection with the adaptation of Swedish law to the EU General Data

Protection Regulation, the government stated that the supervisory authority

has no obligation to take supervisory measures or even to always investigate

the facts more closely.
On the contrary, the authority has a clear discretion to decide for

itself which supervisory cases are to be pursued and how this is to

be done (Government Bill 2017/18:105, pp. 164-165).

Assessment by the Administrative Court

The issue in the case is whether IMY had grounds for not investigating Dr
Complainant's complaint further, beyond sending an information letter to the

region.

Dr Complainant has argued that IMY is obliged to investigate complaints

under the GDPR and that its discretion as to appropriate and necessary

measures relates only to corrective measures under Article 58(2) of the

GDPR, which IMY has not decided in the present case.

Admittedly, the Administrative Court notes, like Dr Klagare, that cases C-

26/22 and C-64/22, as described above, primarily concern corrective measures

under the Data Protection Regulation. However, the Administrative Court
considers that the statements of the Court of Justice of the European Union in

those cases are also relevant to the present review. According to the

Administrative Court, the above provisions, reasons and statements, taken
together, thus support the conclusion that IMY, as

Doc.Id 1771278 Page 7

ADMINISTRATIVE DOM 6034-24
COURT IN STOCKHOLM

of the supervisory authority has considerable discretion to assess the extent to

which a complaint should be investigated and what investigative measures are

appropriate, necessary and proportionate in the individual case. Therefore, even
taking into account the arguments put forward by Dr Complainant in his

appeal, the Administrative Court considers that IMY has the possibility to

decide not to investigate a complaint further and to close a case by sending an
information letter to the controller. However, this discretion is not entirely

unlimited.

Based on what is apparent from Dr Complainant's complaint, the
Administrative Court considers that, at the time of IMY's decision, it must have

appeared uncertain whether the Region had complied with its obligations under

Article 6 of the EU Data Protection Regulation. It was therefore justified to

send an information letter to the Region in the way it did. On the other hand,
the Administrative Court considers that, on an overall assessment of the

evidence in the case, and taking into account what has been presented above,

there is no reason to question IMY's view that no further investigative measure

was necessary.

Against this background, and taking into account what Dr Complainant has

stated in his complaint to IMY and what is evident from the investigation in
general, the Administrative Court considers that IMY has investigated the

matter in question to the extent that is appropriate in the individual case and

that the information letter sent has been a sufficient measure. The arguments

put forward by Dr Complainant regarding what an information letter should
contain do not provide grounds for making any other assessment. In that

context, the Administrative Court also notes that the European Data Protection

Board's working document referred to by Dr Klagare is not binding and
therefore does not lay down any obligations for the supervisory authority as

regards the content of the information letter.

IMY has thus had grounds to close the case without further action. The appeal
should therefore be rejected.

Doc.Id 1771278 Page 8

ADMINISTRATIVE DOM 6034-24
COURT IN STOCKHOLM
