The administrative court in Stockholm assesses that Klarna Bank AB has not violated the data protection regulation to the extent claimed by the Privacy Protection Authority. The court has therefore decided that the penalty fee should be reduced.

The Privacy Protection Authority (IMY) decided on March 28, 2022 to impose a penalty fee of SEK 7.5 million on Klarna Bank AB because the company has breached its information obligation. Klarna Bank AB has appealed the decision and believes, among other things, that the company has been notified of a penalty fee for violating non-binding guidelines and that it is in violation of basic Swedish and European law. According to the company, there is therefore no support for imposing a penalty fee.
Judgment of the court
The administrative court in Stockholm shares IMY's assessment that the registered did not receive sufficient information about how and for what purposes certain personal data is processed. Those registered have also not received sufficient information about their rights. Support for imposing a penalty fee on Klarna Bank AB due to this can be found in the data protection regulation. However, there is not sufficient support that Klarna Bank AB has breached its obligation to provide information to the same extent as IMY claims.
- The court considers that Klarna Bank AB has violated the data protection regulation. However, the violation is not as serious as IMY has assessed in the appealed decision and the penalty fee must therefore be reduced from SEK 7.5 million to SEK 6 million, says councilor Gustav Forsberg.
