The HmbBfDI received a complaint according to which a debt collection service provider had not responded to a debtor's request for information and a copy of data in accordance with Art. 15 (1) and (3) GDPR. The HmbBfDI then contacted the debt collection service provider. As part of the audit, the debt collection service provider stated that it was of the opinion that, as a legal service provider under the Legal Services Act (RDG), it was neither obliged to provide information nor to inform those affected that their applications had been rejected. In its opinion, its work was comparable to that of lawyers. Like them, it would therefore be subject to a duty of confidentiality in the sense of client secrecy. The HmbBfDI does not share this opinion. Lawyers are generally obliged to provide information when they undertake debt collection services. The debt collection service provider nevertheless stuck to its position despite corresponding instructions from the HmbBfDI.

The HmbBfDI then issued an instruction in accordance with Art. 58 (2) lit. c) GDPR and requested the debt collection service provider to provide the complainant with information in accordance with Art. 15 Para. 1 GDPR and to provide a copy of the data in accordance with Art. 15 Para. 3 GDPR and to notify the HmbBfDI of this implementation. In the event of non-implementation of the measure within 2 weeks, a penalty was threatened.

This measure was initially unsuccessful. Although the debt collection service provider contacted the complainant after the instruction was issued and provided general information, there was neither specific information with the information provided for in Art. 15 Para. 1 GDPR nor was a copy of the data sent in accordance with Art. 15 Para. 3 GDPR. The HmbBfDI was also not notified of this. The HmbBfDI will now enforce the threatened penalty. If the information and the copy of the data are not provided, the HmbBfDI can again threaten and enforce a penalty.
