Fine proceedings regarding Covid test centers
During the pandemic situation, a large number of so-called corona test centers were set up and operated. Not all test centers met minimum data protection standards. In a few cases, the violations had reached a level that made it necessary to conduct administrative offense proceedings.
The test centers were of a different nature. Some were doctor's offices that also offered tests in addition to regular patient care. In one such practice, employees had placed written evidence of positive and negative Covid-19 antigen rapid test results from patients in a garbage bag next to a public waste glass container. There was no protection against third parties becoming aware of them. The HmbBfDI did take into account that numerous doctor's offices had closed or were at least only open to a limited extent during the rampant pandemic. The tense situation also resulted in a significant additional burden on the practice affected here. Due to the fact that health data within the meaning of Art. 9 GDPR was handled carelessly and a large number of people were affected, the HmbBfDI could not refrain from conducting administrative offence proceedings. A fine of €1,000 was imposed, which was also accepted by the practice.
In another case, the HmbBfDI had complaints about a pure test center that consistently refused to exercise the right to delete the data of people tested. Now, not every violation of a data subject's right automatically leads to the imposition of a fine, even if health data within the meaning of Art. 9 GDPR is affected. In this case, however, the approach seemed to have a method. Even when the HmbBfDI contacted the company
128 Activity Report Data Protection 2022 - HmbBfDI
and initiated administrative proceedings, nothing changed in the behavior of the test center. The inquiries and requests were consistently ignored. The HmbBfDI has therefore imposed a fine of €1,000. The company has accepted this fine. Those responsible who process large amounts of personal data and thereby disregard the rights of those affected must expect the HmbBfDI to initiate administrative offence proceedings in the future.
In another case, a third test centre had made the test results available for retrieval via URL. Tested persons were sent a URL via unencrypted email under which the test result could be retrieved without any further security measures. In at least 189 cases, the retrieval link was structured in such a way that the path led to the download of a PDF file and the file name corresponded to the last name of the person being tested. With knowledge of the directory path, it was therefore possible to view third-party test results. The last name simply had to be replaced with any other last name. This was obviously a violation of the obligation to properly secure personal (health) data through appropriate technical and organizational measures in accordance with Art. 32 Para. 1 GDPR. The HmbBfDI punished this violation with a fine of €2,700.
The last of the cases described here concerned a test center that wanted to protect itself against inquiries from the Association of Statutory Health Insurance Physicians. For this purpose, the front and back of identity cards of tested persons were scanned and saved on an external hard drive. However, for documentation purposes, only the personal data listed in Section 7 Para. 5 No. 5 and Sections 2 to 4b of the Coronavirus Testing Ordinance would have been saved. For the remaining storage, there was no legal obligation within the meaning of Art. 6 Paragraph 1 Subparagraph 1 Letter c) of GDPR and it was therefore inadmissible, which the test center could and should have known by simply reading the law. The storage of complete identity cards is not only excessive, but also poses considerable risks for those affected. If these storages fall into the wrong hands, there are hardly any limits to the possibilities for misuse. In addition, there was no constructive cooperation between the company and the HmbBfDI with the aim of eliminating the data protection-violating conditions. The HmbBfDI has therefore imposed a fine of around €1,400.
