In the spring of the previous reporting period, a man from Hamburg made a discovery in a waste paper depot container in the city of Hamburg: Several files from a nearby daycare center were publicly accessible and intact. The files contained a large number of documents, such as care contracts with the account details of legal guardians, daycare vouchers issued by district offices, children's vaccination records, pick-up permits, copies of adult ID documents, detailed information sheets for children in care, results of child health checks and much more. The person who found the bundle then informed the daycare center, which was not willing to provide adequate redress for the obvious problem. The caller was only offered the option of bringing the files to the daycare center himself. The daycare center, on the other hand, refused to pick them up or offer to have the documents properly destroyed by the finder. The finder then rightly contacted the HmbBfDI.

After examining the factual and legal situation and hearing from the daycare center, the HmbBfDI imposed a fine in the low four-digit range.

The improper disposal of documents violates Art. 32 Para. 1 GDPR. In addition, in the present case, personal data of children, i.e. of persons requiring special protection, was visible to everyone. The files also contained detailed development documentation, contact information, in some cases health data and also information about parents and those authorized to pick up the child. One document on a preventive medical examination described the development of a boy's testicles, while another document explained that a child was now able to use the toilet independently but still needed to learn to use the zipper better. These examples illustrate that the personal data processed in a daycare center naturally provide the most intimate insights into child development. In addition, contact details and account details were processed in connection with care contracts. Many documents also contained the parents' signatures. In two cases, copies of identity documents were disposed of. Such data has a high potential for misuse.

Due to the quality of the personal data and the fact that many of those affected were children, the HmbBfDI considered it necessary to impose a fine. When determining the fine, the fact that this was a first violation and only negligent commission could be proven was taken into account in the daycare center's favor. The fine was accepted and the decision is legally binding.
