In the 30th TB Data Protection 2021 (Chapter 4.6), the HmbBfDI informed that it had issued a warning to the Senate Chancellery of the Free and Hanseatic City of Hamburg (FHH). The background to this was the then planned use of the video conferencing software Zoom, which in the opinion of the HmbBfDI was not compatible with the GDPR. The Senate Chancellery then filed a lawsuit against the warning before the Hamburg Administrative Court.

On July 10, 2023, the European Commission announced an adequacy decision ("Adequacy decision for the EU-US Data Privacy Framework") within the meaning of Art. 45 (1) GDPR. This makes secure transatlantic data flows possible and at least temporarily dispels the concerns raised by the ECJ in its judgment of July 16, 2020 (case C-311/18 - Facebook Ireland and Schrems). In the opinion of the HmbBfDI, the main reasons for the warning of August 11, 2021 regarding the use of the video communication software "Zoom", which previously existed with regard to the transmission of personal data to a third country without suitable guarantees to protect this data, had essentially ceased to apply.

The Senate Chancellery also saw it this way. As a result, both sides agreed that continuing the court proceedings was no longer expedient due to the changed legal and factual situation. In particular, there was no interest in having the court determine whether the warning in question was correct under the old legal and factual situation.

The HmbBfDI then withdrew the warning in question of August 11, 2021 regarding the use of the video conferencing software "Zoom" with effect for the future. The settlement had no retroactive effect, which is why it remains unclear in court whether the use of ZOOM would have been lawful even before the adequacy decision.
