Summary
In the context of exercising its powers to supervise the implementation of the provisions of the General Regulation (EU) 2016/679 on the protection of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal data (GDPR), of Law 4624/2019 and of other regulations concerning the protection of individuals from the processing of personal data, the Authority initiated, in accordance with the provisions of Articles 57 par. 1 a’, 58 par. 1 b’ of the GDPR and 13 par. 1 h’ and 15 par. 1 of Law 4624/2019, an ex officio inspection procedure at the company Hangzhou DeepSeek Artificial Intelligence Co., Ltd. regarding the Artificial Intelligence services of the DeepSeek platform that it provides both on the internet and through a related application (web- and app-based) to personal data subjects located in Europe and in particular in Greece.

The Authority found that the company Hangzhou DeepSeek Artificial Intelligence Co., Ltd. violated its obligation to appoint a representative in the EU under Article 27 GDPR, because, although it does not have an establishment in the EU, it falls within the scope of the GDPR, based on Article 3 para. 2 letter b’ and, consequently, is obliged to appoint a representative in the EU in accordance with Article 27 GDPR, it has not fulfilled this obligation.

The Authority addressed the company Hangzhou DeepSeek Artificial Intelligence Co. (data controller), which provides AI services through the DeepSeek platform, based on Article 58, paragraph 2, subparagraph d of the GDPR, is mandated to appoint a representative in the EU in writing, in accordance with the provision of Article 27 of the GDPR and to inform the Authority accordingly.
