4\. Order to provide information
A company received a request to provide a copy of data relating to certain personal data of the applicant, but did not respond to this or to corresponding requests from the HmbBfDI. The HmbBfDI therefore issued an instruction to provide this copy of data under threat of a penalty if the request was not implemented.
A company received a request to provide a copy of data relating to certain personal data of the applicant, but did not respond to this or to corresponding requests from the HmbBfDI. The HmbBfDI therefore issued an instruction to provide this copy of data under threat of a penalty if the request was not implemented.
126 Data Protection Activity Report 2022 - HmbBfDI
The HmbBfDI received a complaint alleging that a company had ignored a request for information and a copy of data in accordance with Art. 15 (1) and (3) GDPR. This data copy related to data on booking transactions that the company had stored in its financial accounting system for the complainant. Since this data related to the complainant and also the respective booking transactions under the booking account created in the complainant's name, this data also counts as personal data within the meaning of Art. 4 No. 1 GDPR. After the HmbBfDI informed the company in writing of the obligation to observe the rights asserted by the data subject, the company provided the complainant with information in accordance with Art. 15 Para. 1 GDPR. However, the company subsequently no longer responded to further written communication attempts and requests from the HmbBfDI to also provide the complainant with the requested data copy.
The HmbBfDI therefore issued an instruction in accordance with Art. 58 Para. 2 lit. c) GDPR and requested the company to provide the complainant with a copy of the data specified by the complainant in terms of type and time period. If the measure was not implemented within 2 weeks, a penalty of 5,000.00 euros was threatened. This measure was successful. After receiving the notice, the company immediately contacted the HmbBfDI to comply with the instruction with the aim of avoiding the penalty payment. The cooperation was then very cooperative. The company initiated all necessary measures to provide the complainant with a copy of all the data relating to him in the financial accounting system. The company had to bear the resulting administrative costs through an increased processing fee.
