Search engine according to GDPR

Date: 02/04/2020
Title: Question about sending messages without prior registration
Number: 0712-1 / 2019/2725
Subject matter: Direct marketing, sweepstakes, Telecommunications and mail
Legal act: Opinion

The Information Commissioner (hereinafter referred to as IP) has received an e-mail from you stating that the designated travel agency "spam" the Slovenian domain "info @" without first registering on the mailing list. Accordingly, you are interested in whether they are allowed to do this.

On the basis of the information you have provided, hereinafter referred to as Article 58 of Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 April 2016 on the protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data and Directive 95/46 / EC (hereinafter referred to as the General Data Protection Regulation or Regulation), point 7 of the first paragraph of Article 49 of the Personal Data Protection Act (Official Gazette RS, No. 94/07, officially consolidated text, hereinafter ZVOP-1) and Article 2 of the Information Commissioner Act (Official Gazette of the Republic of Slovenia, No. 113/05, hereinafter ZInfP), we provide our non-binding opinion regarding your question.

IP explains that the protection of personal data refers to the processing of personal data, with personal data being data that point to an individual. Data relating to a legal entity and other business entities (eg e-mail info@podjetje.si) are not protected personal data, therefore they are not subject to the rules of personal data protection. Prior informed consent is therefore not required in such a case.

Corporate marketing rules are governed by the Electronic Communications Act (ZEKom-1) and the Electronic Commerce Market Act (ZEPT). The provisions of ZEKom-1 and ZEPT are overseen by the Agency for Communications Networks and Services (AKOS) and the Market Inspectorate of the RS (TIRS). If you believe that this is a violation of the rules of law, you can report directly to AKOS.
