Page 1 of 7
Page 1 of 7
Number: 0600-43/2024/12
Date: 20. 3. 2025
The Information Commissioner (hereinafter: IP) issues, on behalf of the State Supervisor for Personal Data Protection Anže Novak, pursuant to Articles 2 and 8 of the Information Commissioner Act (Official Gazette of the Republic of Slovenia, No. 113/05 and 51/07 – ZustS-A, hereinafter: ZInfP), Articles 57, 58 and 77 of Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 April 2016 on the protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data, and repealing Directive 95/46/EC (General Data Protection Regulation, hereinafter: the General Regulation) and Articles 34 and 55 Article 1 of the Personal Data Protection Act (Official Gazette of the Republic of Slovenia, No. 163/22; hereinafter: ZVOP-2), in the proceedings conducted by the IP as a supervisory authority on the basis of a complaint dated 2 October 2024 (hereinafter: complaint), filed by … (hereinafter: complainant), against …, represented by … (hereinafter: supervised controller) in the matter of establishing a personal data protection violation, the following DECISION: 1. It is established that the supervised controller … violated the principle of legality under Article 5(1)(a) and 6(1) of the General Regulation by redirecting e-mail from the address of … to the address of …. 2. The extension of the request dated 20 December 2024 to address the lawfulness of the storage of the complainant’s personal data in the electronic message archive at … is not permitted. 3. Measures to restore the legal status shall not be ordered against the supervised operator.
4. No restriction shall be imposed on the reporting party … regarding the examination of the case file kept by the IP under No. 0600-
43/2024.
5. The IP has not incurred any special costs in this procedure, the reporting party and the supervised operator shall bear their own costs of the procedure.
EXPLANATORY NOTES
I. Facts
1. The reporting party filed a complaint against the supervised operator on 2 October 2024. In the complaint, she stated that,
after the termination of her employment relationship with the supervised operator on 1 April 2022, the latter, as her
employer, did not terminate the email address … and continued to use it.
2. On 4 October 2024, the IP confirmed the activity of the email address in the office (minutes no. 0600-43/2024/5
on checking the activity of the email address). Then, with the summons no. 0600-43/2024/6 dated 7 October
Page 2 of 7
2024, he served the minutes and the report on the supervised operator and invited him to make a statement regarding the alleged circumstances and IP's findings within 5 days.
3. In his response dated 14 October 2024, the supervised operator explained that the reporting agent's employment ended on 31 March 2022, and that the reporting agent provided him with an essential service, namely resolving claims or mediating in this regard between clients and insurance companies.
He stated that the email that arrived at her work email address: ... was extremely important for his business, so it was redirected to the director's email address. No human sent an outgoing message from the address... (only automatic outgoing messages were sent). The supervised operator further stated that the complainant also used the email address ... as her secondary or verification email address for her personal email address, which allegedly proves that she was aware that her address ... was still active and that she did not object to it. The supervised operator also stated that the motive for reporting the IP was revenge against the director with whom she and the complainant were in a relationship, and that the report was not made in a panic, as the complainant claims. 4. The supervised controller further rejects the allegation that he used her email address after the end of her employment, which is demonstrated by the findings from the report of the IT service provider for the company …, the company
… dated 9. 10. 2024, which shows that after 30. 3. 2022 no emails were sent, either to internal or external persons, by a human person from the mailbox … with the email address ....
The supervised controller explained that the emails sent from the email address
… were automatic messages sent until 28. 7. 2022 as “message processing notifications”, which were automatically generated by the archiving tool and the Mailstore mailing system when the messages were archived and
removed from the mailbox. According to the supervised operator, the Mailstore system records all received and sent messages within the group … for compliance reasons. The supervised operator also explained that these notifications are always generated when the automatic archive function is started, which moves the message from the mailbox to the archiving tool and deletes it from the mailbox. In this way, the sender is informed that the message has been deleted from the recipient’s mailbox and that no one has read it. The supervised operator further states that after 28. 7. 2022, the archive function was no longer implemented and the system no longer sent further processing notifications. The supervised operator also explained that the complainant’s mailbox was deleted on 3. 1. 2023, and the email address .. was redirected to …, as business communication was still being received at the email address …. The report also states that the redirection was carried out at the request of the director…. On
8. 10. 2024, the redirection was terminated. Since then, senders of emails to the email
address … have received a system notification from the scanning tool … about an invalid recipient (550
5.1.351 The remote server returned a message: unknown recipient or mailbox unreachable ->
554 5.7.1 <….>: Rejected recipient: Invalid recipient), and the received email is no longer
forwarded to the email address….
5. Based on the explanations received, the IP informed the reporting entity and the supervisory controller of the essential findings and invited them to express their views on the findings (Information on the essential findings in the procedure before issuing a decision, No. 0600-43/2024/8 – correct /9, dated 19 December 2024, hereinafter: essential findings). In informing the relevant findings, the IP explained that, in accordance with Article 31 of the ZVOP-2, it is bound by the basis of the claim and, within this framework, establishes a violation of the protection of the reporting entity's personal data. Regarding the applicant's claim concerning the allegation of unlawful processing of personal data by the supervised controller redirecting emails from the address … to the address …, the IP concluded that the supervised controller had failed to demonstrate a legal basis for the redirection of emails in accordance with the principle of liability under Article 5(2) and 24 of the GDPR. It therefore infringed Article 5(1)(a) and 6(1) of the GDPR. 6. The supervised controller provided a response dated 20.12.2024 in relation to the main findings issued, stating that the IP had not properly taken into account the specific work of the applicant, which was dealing with compensation claims under insurance contracts. It further stated that speed was of the essence in handling these claims, and that by redirecting emails the supervised controller had prevented material damage to its clients. The supervised controller also allegedly had the "implied consent" of the applicant to carry out the redirection, because she was aware of the existence of the email address ... even after her employment had ceased, which is evidenced by the fact that the applicant used the email address ... as a verification email address in her personal email inbox. 7. The applicant also provided her response to the essential findings in a letter dated 20.12.2024, in which she stated that until the date of filing the application on 2.10.2024 she was not aware that the email address ... was still active and that she was receiving mail to this address .... She also stated that she did not have access to this email address and that if she had it set as a second key, she was not aware of it or had forgotten it. These statements are also confirmed by the email communication with ..., which she attached. She stressed that she filed the report out of fear and that she also requested the supervised controller to delete all of her images related to the company …. She added that she was convinced that the supervised controller also kept her entire email archive and that she personally believed that her emails should be deleted and that this should also be checked. II. Preliminary examination and scope of supervision General 8. Based on the first paragraph of Article 31 of the ZVOP-2, in the case of a report by a reporter with a special position, the supervisory authority shall initiate a supervision procedure when the report contains the elements specified for the application by the act regulating the general administrative procedure, as well as an indication of the controller or processor and an indication of the violations in the processing or security of his or her personal data, from which a violation of the regulations referred to in the previous Article arises. The reporter must indicate the conduct of the controller or processor which (if proven to be true in the ascertainment procedure before the IP) constitutes a violation of the regulations, whereby the violator has infringed the right to the protection of the reporter’s personal data.
Regarding unlawful redirection
9. In the preliminary examination of the application, the IP established that the application of 2.10.2024 contains what is necessary to allow it to be considered, in particular, the indication of the supervised operator and the definition of the alleged violation, which constitutes a violation of the regulations. The alleged violation relates to the use of the electronic address ... for the purpose of redirecting electronic mail, without a legal basis.
10. The IP establishes that the supervised operator (former employer) is the operator of the electronic address ..., which it assigned to the applicant at the time when she was still employed for the purpose of official communication, and the electronic address ... constitutes personal data of the applicant, since it concerns information relating to the applicant as an identifiable individual. The storage and use of an email address constitutes automated processing of personal data within the meaning of Article 2 of the GDPR and therefore, in these processing activities, the controller must comply with the protection requirements of the data protection regulations, including the lawfulness of the processing (processing under the conditions set out in Article 6(1) of the GDPR1). 11. The IP notes that “use” of an email address may refer to any form of processing of that data, including the redirection of an email to another email address. For 1 Pursuant to Article 6(1) of the GDPR, processing is lawful only if and to the extent that at least one of the following conditions is met: (a) the data subject has consented to the processing of his or her personal data for one or more specific purposes; (b) the processing is necessary for the performance of a contract to which the data subject is party or in order to take steps at the request of such a data subject prior to entering into a contract; (c) processing is necessary for compliance with a legal obligation to which the controller is subject; (d) processing is necessary to protect the vital interests of the data subject or of another natural person; (e) processing is necessary for the performance of a task carried out in the public interest or in the exercise of official authority vested in the controller; (f) processing is necessary for the purposes of the legitimate interests pursued by the controller or by a third party, except where such interests are overridden by the interests or fundamental rights and freedoms of the data subject which require protection of personal data, in particular where the data subject is a child.
Page 4 of 7
For any such processing, the controller must first demonstrate an appropriate legal basis and ensure
other conditions for the compliance of the processing of personal data (adequate information, ensuring the shortest
storage period, etc.).
12. The procedure at the request of a complainant with a special situation is intended to establish the alleged violation at the time of filing the report and to eliminate irregularities or establish a lawful state. To this extent, the IP also conducts a declaratory procedure in the case under consideration.
13. The IP establishes that the alleged violation of 2.10.2024 in the case under consideration relates to
illegal processing of personal data, in that the supervised controller redirected
emails from the address… to the address ... . To this extent, the IP also conducted a substantive assessment
(hereinafter).
Regarding the illegal storage of the mailbox
14. In response to the essential findings of 20.12.2024, the applicant stated, among other things, that she is convinced that the supervised controller also stores the entire archive of her email and that she personally believes that her emails should be deleted and that this should also be checked.
15. The applicant's stated statement in the letter of 20.12.2024 constitutes an extension of the original claim from her application of 2.10.2024. Based on Article 133 of the ZUP, once the procedure has been initiated, the party may, until the first instance decision is issued, extend or amend the claim made, regardless of whether the extended or amended claim has the same legal basis or not, if such claim is based on the same essential elements of the factual situation and if the authority is competent to resolve it. If the authority conducting the procedure does not allow the extension or amendment of the claim, it shall issue a decision to this effect. An appeal is allowed against such a decision. 16. The IP notes that in order to assess the legality of the storage of the entire archive of e-mail allegedly stored by the supervised controller (to which the extension of the claim relates), it is necessary to establish a substantially different factual situation than for the legality of the use or redirection of e-mail (to which the applicant's original claim relates). When establishing the circumstances of the legality of the storage of e-mails in a potential archive, it is first necessary to define the types of personal data, the amount of data, the time of their acquisition, etc. and then to establish the legality of the storage of this data in the present time (in particular, the employer's interest in preserving the data and business communication that took place while the applicant was employed must be weighed against the applicant's interest in having her data deleted). In the case of the redirection of e-mail, to which the basic request refers, there is a completely different scope of data (only the e-mail address) and a different processing of data (redirecting e-mail), which is carried out for a completely different purpose (not for the purpose of preserving data and business communication in the archive). Since the applicant's extended request is therefore not based on the same essential elements of the factual situation, but the IP would have to establish a completely different factual situation in order to decide on the extended request, the IP decided not to allow the extension of the request in these proceedings, as follows from the Extension of the request of 20 December 2024 to the consideration of the legality of the storage of the applicant's personal data ... in the archive of electronic messages at ... is not allowed.. point of the operative part of this decision. 17. In accordance with the ZUP, the extension of the request is decided by a decision against which an appeal may be lodged. Since the same legal protection is provided for a decision as for a decision, the IP decided on the extension of the claim in the operative part of this decision, as this does not reduce the level of protection of the party in the administrative procedure.
18. The IP notes that the applicant may request the deletion of her data from the archive of her electronic messages under the conditions set out in Article 17 of the General Regulation directly from the controller of her personal data. She has the possibility of legal protection against the controller's response or non-response by filing a complaint with the IP. In such a procedure (after a preliminary procedure regarding the exercise of rights with the controller), the IP determines the applicant's entitlement to deletion in accordance with Article 17 of the General Regulation.
Page 5 of 7
III. Substantive decision of the IP
19. The complaint is well-founded.
20. The IP took up the complaint for substantive assessment that the supervised controller, at the time of filing the application on 2 October 2024, unlawfully processed the applicant's email address... by enabling the redirection of emails to the address of the director... . To determine this, it is crucial to answer whether the conditions set out in Article 6(1) of the General Regulation are met for such processing of personal data. 21. In accordance with Article 5(2) and 24 of the General Regulation, the controller is obliged to demonstrate the compliance of the processing of personal data. 22. From the explanations of the supervised controller dated 14.10.2024, which the IP takes into account in accordance with the principle of responsibility referred to in Article 5(2) and 24 of the General Regulation, it follows that before filing the application (on 3.1.2023) the supervised controller set up a redirection of e-mails from the address … to the e-mail mailbox of its director … . This is stated by the supervised controller in its responses to the IP’s requests, and is also confirmed by the report of the IT service provider, … dated 9.10.2024. This factual situation is not disputed between the parties.
23. The existence of a legal basis for such processing of personal data is disputed, which, in accordance with Article 6(1) of the General Regulation, must be based on one of the six permissible legal bases.
24. In its response of 20 December 2024, which the IP takes into account in accordance with the principle of liability set out in Article 5(2) and 24 of the General Regulation, the supervised operator stated that the redirection was allegedly carried out with the “implied consent” of the reporting party and that the redirection was intended to “prevent major financial damage to its clients”. 25. In justifying the legality, the supervised operator did not refer to a specific legal basis in accordance with Article 6(1) of the General Regulation, despite the fact that it was explicitly requested to do so in letter No. 0600-43/2024/6 (point 7 of the request) and was also expressly reminded of this in paragraph 13 of the main findings. In view of the above, the IP can only speculate on which basis under Article 6(1) the controller relies on when it argues that the applicant was aware of the processing or “impliedly consented” to it because she had an address … as a secondary address for her personal email address. 26. Insofar as the controller thereby relied on the legal basis under Article 6(1)(a) of the GDPR - CONSENT, it would have to demonstrate that the applicant freely, specifically, informedly and unambiguously consented to such processing (the redirection of her email to the address of the director) or that her consent contains all the elements of consent as defined in point 11 of Article 4 of the GDPR. The presumption of consent based on indirect circumstances (that the applicant was aware that the email address … existed because she had it set as a secondary email address) does not justify the unambiguousness of consent, which requires that the individual must demonstrate their will for a specific processing of their personal data by active conduct. Any awareness of the existence or activity of the email address also does not justify knowledge that a redirection was included (consent was therefore not informed). The conditions of lawfulness in accordance with Article 6(1)(a) and, with regard to consent, additionally in accordance with the first subparagraph of Article 7 of the GDPR have therefore not been demonstrated by the supervised controller in the circumstances under consideration. 27. Furthermore, it is not clear from the statements of the supervised controller which elements of the lawfulness of the processing pursuant to Article 6(1) of the General Regulation it justifies when it refers to the fact that it prevented major material damage to customers by redirecting. In the remainder of its letter, the supervised controller does highlight the statement from the summary of the Guidelines of the European Data Protection Board, No. 1/2024, in the above Guidelines,2 which refers to the legal basis of legitimate interest under Article 2 https://www.edpb.europa.eu/our-work-tools/documents/public-consultations/2024/guidelines-12024-processing-personal-data-based\_enPage 6 of 7 6(1)(f) of the General Regulation, but it does not substantiate the necessary elements to justify the legitimate interest for the processing in question. 28. The Guidelines define the conditions for the lawfulness of processing under Article 6(1)(f) of the GDPR. In order to establish the lawfulness of this legal basis, the controller would have to demonstrate that the processing passes the three levels of weighing of legitimate interest (lawfulness/permissibility of the purpose, necessity or necessity and proportionality with regard to the interference with the rights and freedoms of the individual). However, the controller did not provide justifications according to these criteria. The IP notes that in the case at hand, the processing is questionable already according to the first level of the test, which requires that processing in the legitimate interest must be permissible and not contrary to mandatory regulations. Redirection of e-mail may also constitute unjustified interception of communication and thus a criminal offence under point 2 of the second paragraph of Article 139 of the Criminal Code-13 or a breach of confidentiality of communications under the fifth paragraph of Article 214 of the ZEKom-2.4 29. In addition to the above, the processing in the case at hand does not meet the following levels of weighing. If the purpose of the redirection was to avert the risk of material damage to customers (which the supervised controller mentions), this is not necessary or necessary, since there are other effective technical solutions that, without infringing on privacy, immediately enable the transmission of information about the failed shipment and thus achieve the purpose to which the supervised controller referred. In this regard, it is completely normal and understandable in the modern communications world that when the recipient receives such a notification about the undelivered shipment, he knows that he must send his request to another, working address. There are also solutions for automatic notification that the recipient did not receive the message and that the sender should contact another address that may be specified in such a message, and no one will be informed of the content of the message. The supervised operator also apparently did not consider the redirection solution to be absolutely necessary, since on the same day that he received the IP's request, on 8 October 2024, he cancelled the email redirection, even though the IP did not call on him to do so with this request.
30. Finally, the supervised controller in the case under consideration cannot justify the third balancing test, which includes determining the proportionality of the processing taking into account the rights and freedoms of the complainant. This last test also takes into account, in particular, that the individual is duly informed about the processing, including the right to object to the processing, which was not demonstrated in the case under consideration, or the evidence suggests otherwise.
31. The IP also rejects the statements of the supervised controller in relation to the summary of the Guidelines, which provides general examples of the processing of personal data on the basis of legitimate interest. The IP emphasizes that the summary of the Guidelines is merely informative material intended to raise the awareness of data subjects and not a binding practice. In addition, the examples highlighted do not correspond to the actual situation in the case under consideration. The supervised controller highlights the statement that it may be in the legitimate interest to “obtain information about a person who has harmed someone in order to sue them for compensation”5, which is not the case for the processing in the case at hand (namely, the supervised controller processed the data of a former employee and not with the aim of obtaining compensation for the damage that this person allegedly caused him). The supervised controller also highlights that the processing may be in the legitimate interest, insofar as it is for a “commercial (market) purpose”,6 which also does not correspond to the processing in the case at hand, since
3 A fine or imprisonment of up to one year shall be imposed on anyone who, by using technical means, unjustifiably becomes acquainted with a message,
transmitted by telephone or by any other electronic means of communication.
4 All forms of surveillance or interception of communications carried out by third parties other than the users involved in the communication, such as the listening, interception, recording, storage and forwarding of communications referred to in the first paragraph of this Article without the consent of the users concerned, shall be prohibited, unless permitted in accordance with the preceding paragraph or in accordance with Articles 220 and 228 of this Act, or unless such surveillance or interception is strictly necessary for the transmission of communications (e.g. fax messages, e-mail, e-mail boxes, voice mail, SMS service).
5 “obtaining the personal information of a person who damaged someone’s property in order to sue that person for damages”,
https://www.edpb.europa.eu/system/files/2024-10/edpb\_summary\_202401\_legitimateinterest\_en.pdf
6 “Commercial interest”, ibid.
Page 7 of 7
the case concerns certain forms of direct marketing within the meaning of recital 47 of the GDPR.
32. No other indications indicating the existence of another legal basis under Article 6(1) of the GDPR that could be taken into account by the IP emerge from the responses of the supervised controller and the circumstances of the case. The supervised controller has therefore failed to demonstrate, in accordance with the principle of liability, the lawfulness of the redirection of the complainant's e-mail.
33. The IP concludes that, at the time of the filing of the complaint, the supervised controller infringed the principle of lawfulness by redirecting e-mail from the address … to the address …, thereby unlawfully processing the personal data of … and thereby infringing Article 5(1)(a) and 6(1) of the GDPR, as follows from point 1 of the operative part of this
decision.
34. Since it follows from the response of the supervised operator that it terminated the redirection of e-mail on 8 October 2024 and that since then senders to the address … have been receiving a notification of failed delivery of the message, the IP assesses that it is not necessary to order additional measures to restore the legal situation to the supervised operator. Therefore, the IP has decided, as follows from the operative part of this decision. Measures to restore the legal situation shall not be ordered to the supervised operator. 35. The content of the file does not reveal protected personal data of third parties, classified information or other protected data, which would justify restricting the applicant's access to the file, therefore this is not ordered, as follows from point 4 of the operative part of this decision. IV. Costs and fees 36. No special costs were incurred in this supervisory procedure (the IP did not incur any special costs in this procedure, the applicant and the supervised operator shall bear their own procedural costs. 36. operative part of the decision). The applicant and the operator shall bear their own costs, which they may have incurred as a result of the procedure
(second paragraph of Article 30 of the ZVOP-2).
37. Since, in accordance with the provision of Article 57(3) of the General Regulation, the performance of the tasks of each supervisory authority
(including the handling of reports submitted by the reporting person to whom personal data are related pursuant to point (f)
of Article 57(1) of the General Regulation) is free of charge for the data subject
and since, pursuant to the second paragraph of Article 55 of the ZVOP-2, the supervisory authority exercises the powers and tasks referred to in the first
paragraph of Article 55 of the ZVOP-2, which also includes decision-making in the reporting procedures of reporting persons with a special situation, free of charge, this is also free of charge, notwithstanding the provisions of the Administrative Fees Act (Official Gazette of the Republic of Slovenia, No. 106/10 – official consolidated text, 14/15 – ZUUJFO, 84/15 – ZZelP-J, 32/16, 30/18
– ZKZaš and 189/20 – ZFRO; ZUT) decision.
V. Instructions on legal remedies:
This decision is not subject to appeal, but a lawsuit may be filed within 30 days of receipt of this
decision at the Administrative Court in Ljubljana, Fajfarjeva 33, Ljubljana, in writing directly to the aforementioned
court or by registered mail or orally on the record. If the lawsuit is sent by registered mail, it shall be deemed to have been received on time if it was posted on the last day of the deadline for filing a lawsuit. The lawsuit, with any attachments, shall be filed in at least three copies. The lawsuit must also be accompanied by this decision in the original
or a copy, and the court fee must be paid.
Anže Novak
State Supervisor for Personal Data Protection
