Date: 18.05.2020
Title: Use of data from the legal database for the purpose of inviting patients to participate in treatment or research
Number: 07120-1 / 2020/358
Subject matter: Legal basis, Statistics and research, Medical personal data
Legal act: Opinion

On 13 May 2020, we received your question from the Information Commissioner (IP) on whether the NIJZ, on the basis of data from the REGISTER OF INFECTIOUS DISEASES no. According to the Health Care Databases Act (ZZPPZ), NIJZ 48 contacts persons who have survived COVID-19 with the intention of going to the selected personal physician and later to the Institute of Transfusion Medicine (ZTM) for blood collection for testing and treatment of critically ill patients with COVID-19. ZTM is investigating the treatment of severely ill patients with COVID-19 on the basis of plasma obtained from the blood of patients who have survived the disease, but has no data on these patients.

On the basis of the information you have provided to us, in accordance with Article 58 of Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 April 2016 on the protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data Directive 95/46 / EC (hereinafter: the General Regulation on Data Protection), point 7 of the first paragraph of Article 49 of the Personal Data Protection Act (Official Gazette of the Republic of Slovenia, No. 94/07-UPB1, hereinafter ZVOP-1) and Article 2 of the Information Commissioner Act (Official Gazette of the Republic of Slovenia, No. 113/05, hereinafter ZInfP) provides our non-binding opinion on your issue.
 
 
According to the IP, it is permissible for the NIJZ, on the basis of data in its own databases (eg Records of Infectious Diseases), to send to persons who have survived COVID-19 an invitation from the Institute of Transfusion Medicine to participate in research and treatment of seriously ill persons with COVID-19. 19.

Explanations:
 
In this case, it is a combination of internal processing of health data (in search of the target group) and contact data (in the invitation itself) of patients, which would be carried out for research purposes and the purpose of treating other persons and in such a way that ZTM knew which patients were involved, and patients would have complete freedom to be included in the research or treatment and the related processing of personal data.
 
In the part of the processing relating to health data, the legal basis in a specific case may be (one or more):
(c) point (2) of Article 9 of the General Data Protection Regulation, as it is indirectly about protecting the vital interests of seriously ill patients (ie preventing serious deterioration of health), and sick patients cannot physically give consent at this stage they have not yet been established;
(h) point 2 of the second paragraph of Article 9 of the General Data Protection Regulation, because the search for surviving patients is indirectly (or in this, the first phase) necessary to provide medical care or treatment that would take place in accordance with national health regulations;
(j) point (2) of the second paragraph of Article 9 of the General Data Protection Regulation, as processing is also necessary for scientific research purposes related to treatment.
In the part of the processing relating to contact details, the legal basis in this case may be that it is a purpose compatible (see the fourth paragraph of Article 6 of the General Data Protection Regulation) with the basic purpose of keeping infectious disease records. the purpose is to monitor the occurrence of infectious diseases, their characteristics and the evaluation of measures). This applies both for research purposes and for the purpose of treating other persons. With regard to research, the General Data Protection Regulation itself provides in point (b) of the first paragraph of Article 5 that “further processing for archiving purposes in the public interest, for scientific or historical research purposes or for statistical purposes in accordance with Article 89 (1) shall not apply. incompatible with the original purposes ”. The first paragraph of Article 17 of ZVOP-1 stipulates similarly, namely that, regardless of the original purpose of collection, personal data may be further processed for historical, statistical and scientific-research purposes. According to the 159th introductory recital of the General Data Protection Regulation, the processing of personal data for scientific research purposes should be interpreted broadly for the purposes of this Regulation (eg professional testing of a new treatment method may also be considered as research). In addition, obtaining consent or establishing contact for obtaining consent is already considered to be the first or at least the previous phase of the research process. And if this treatment can be performed by the controller in his own interest, there are no obstacles to him doing the same in the interest of another research organization, provided that the data on the invited patients are not disclosed to it.
 
Although this is not exactly the same factual situation, we also refer to the already issued opinion IP no. 0712-18 / 2012/2 (use of data to obtain consents) and 0712-571 / 2010/2 (execution of sending consent invitations for another entity). At the same time, we clarify that this is not the same situation as in the negative opinion of IP no. 0712-1 / 2018/1780, which referred to invitations for revaccination.
 
Best regards,
 
Prepared:
mag. Urban Brulc, Univ. dipl. right.
independent IP consultant
 
Mojca Prelesnik, B.Sc. dipl. right.
Information Commissioner
