P R E S S E R I T S E L I N G LfDI control brings about a stop to inadmissible publications of personal insolvency data At the urging of the Bremen State Commissioner for Data Protection and Freedom of Information (LfDI), law firms entrusted with insolvency administration have worked towards the search mask in the digital creditor information system they use being reprogrammed in compliance with data protection.

In connection with a complaints procedure, the LfDI became aware that the data of the insolvency debtors was publicly accessible on the websites of the law firms without any prerequisites. The LfDI then checked the publication of this data in the creditor information systems of the most popular insolvency law firms operating in Germany and based in Bremen. In doing so, she determined that the publications violated data protection due to the lack of a sufficient legal basis. The affected law firms were mostly cooperative and successfully influenced the software provider. The adapted software is now also used nationwide by non-verified law firms.

From now on, the data of the insolvency debtors can only be requested in the publicly accessible creditor information systems of those insolvency law firms that use the software of the provider concerned if their first and last name, the insolvency court and the court file number are entered in the search mask.

The Bremen State Commissioner for Data Protection and Freedom of Information, Dr. Sommer, is satisfied that the technical solution achieved will prevent the illegal publications that have been identified in the future: "Once again it has been shown that in a digitized world data protection through technology is the be-all and end-all. Insolvency law firms are fundamentally legally obliged to have digital information systems ready that contain data from insolvency debtors. This must of course be done in accordance with data protection regulations. In addition to the limited findability of the personal data, this also means that the statutory deletion periods are observed. We will continue to monitor this in the future, in particular because the publication of this data is for those affected significant economic stigma."

Contact/enquiries:

dr Imke Sommer, telephone 0421 361-2010
