tenor
1. The lawsuit is dismissed.
2. The plaintiff bears the costs of the legal dispute.
3. The judgment is provisionally enforceable. The plaintiff may avert enforcement by providing security of 110% of the amount enforceable on the basis of the judgment, unless the defendant provides security of 110% of the amount to be enforced before enforcement.
facts
The plaintiff states that, as a consumer, he ordered household goods from the defendant in the online shop in 2020, stating his name and address. The defendant operates the website \[xxx\]. The plaintiff did not provide any further information on the ordering process. The plaintiff is of the opinion that a large number of serious data protection violations have been identified on the defendant's websites and that his personal data has been processed unreliably. The defendant deliberately integrated malware into its website, which manipulated the plaintiff's Internet browser in such a way that the plaintiff's personal data was not only illegally processed by the defendant itself, but was also irreversibly forwarded to foreign third-party companies in order to change the Internet usage behavior of the plaintiff spy on the plaintiff as well as data on his computer and internet connection and to create comprehensive personality profiles from them (so-called trackers). The defendant also stored cookies requiring consent on the plaintiff's computer as part of some of these trackers without consent. The plaintiff is of the opinion that he is therefore entitled to an injunctive relief for violating Art. Furthermore, there is a violation of Art. 26 GDPR (joint responsibility) and a violation of Art. 44 GDPR (third country transmission). The plaintiff requests that1. to order the defendant to refrain from delivering its websites or subdomains or subpages thereof with one of the following services in such a way that personal or related data of the plaintiff - such as his IP address - are sent to the respective operator of these services when the page is accessed or by those commissioned to do so, unless the plaintiff has previously consented to this within the meaning of Art. 4 No. 11 GDPR: a) Google Tag Managerb) Google Analyticsc) Google Fontsd) Google Recaptcae) Google Optimizef) Doubleclickg) Youtubeh ) Facebooki) Pinterestj) Taboolak) Fonts Awesomel) Fonts.comm) Bing Adsn) Cquotiento) Amplifyp) Trboq) Zenloop of the defendant for each violation of no threatening imprisonment for a maximum of 2 years, whereby the imprisonment is to be carried out on the defendant's managing directors. The defendant requests that the action be dismissed n. The defendant complains that the plaintiff did not explain the alleged processing of his data with sufficient specificity and also described it incorrectly. The plaintiff states neither a specific date of his alleged order nor a specific online shop in which he placed such an order and, on the basis of this, claims to have visited one of the defendant's websites. The action is already inadmissible due to its lack of specificity, and there is no basis for a claim since the GDPR blocks civil claims for injunctive relief. In particular, he could not rely on ยง 1004 BGB, since the GDPR, as fully harmonized Union law, provides for its own final sanction regime.
