LfDI Baden-Württemberg has imposed fines for improper use of land register data
Data from public registers such as the land register are also not freely available
The state representative Dr. Stefan Brink: “Those responsible should be aware that public data also enjoys protection and is not freely available. The fines imposed in the present case make it clear that clandestine data processing using special access rights does not pay off. The General Data Protection Regulation also applies in the highly competitive building land market.”
The State Commissioner for Data Protection and Freedom of Information in Baden-Württemberg has imposed fines of EUR 50,000 and EUR 5,000 on a property developer and a surveyor for illegal data collection and transfer and breaches of information obligations.
A property owner in a new development area had received a letter from a property developer in which he was offered a purchase price for his property. The letter did not contain any information about the origin of his data, and even when asked, the addressee was not told where the developer got his data from, in particular the knowledge of his position as owner.
The fine office at the State Commissioner then determined that a surveyor had made use of his authorization to inspect the electronic land register in the automated retrieval process and in two cases had identified several hundred property owners without their knowledge and passed on the relevant information to a property developer. The latter, in turn, wrote to the owners determined in this way with a purchase price offer for their properties without providing the necessary information according to Art. 14 DS-GVO, in particular without informing about the origin of the data.
On the one hand, this procedure constitutes a violation of Art. 6 Para. 1 DS-GVO. When weighing up interests within the scope of Art. 6 Para. 1 Letter f DS-GVO, it must be taken into account that no prior business relationship existed and the owners did not have to assume that their data would be available in the land register for advertising purposes. The fact that property owners can neither object to the entry in the land register nor to the transmission of data is of particular importance here, rather their data is collected on the basis of a legal obligation. However, this legal obligation does not serve to address advertising, but rather to ensure legal certainty in real estate transactions. Accordingly, it is also generally recognized for the right to inspect the land register that a sole interest in acquisition does not entitle to inspect, rather concrete contract negotiations are required.
In addition, there was also a violation of Art. 14 DS-GVO in that the owners were not provided with any information on data processing, even when they were contacted. However, this information is an essential prerequisite for data subjects in order to be able to assert their rights under Art. 15 et seq. DS-GVO. There was also no reason for exclusion in the present case, in particular § 12 GBO does not constitute a legal regulation within the meaning of Art. 14 Para. 5 Letter c DS-GVO, since neither the data-collecting body nor The scope, purpose or duration of the data collection can be seen.
When assessing the fine, in addition to the number of people affected, the type of data affected and the importance of the violated regulations, the cooperation of the responsible bodies in the fine procedure was taken into account.
The fines were accepted by those responsible and are now legally binding.
For questions you can contact us on the telephone number
0711/615541-23 and by email: pressestelle@lfdi.bwl.de
Further information on data protection and freedom of information can be found on the Internet at www.baden-wuerttemberg.datenschutz.de or at www.datenschutz.de.
