Date of judgment

2025-01-08 final judgment

Date of receipt

2021-05-18

Court

Supreme Administrative Court

Judges

Hanna Knysiak - Sudyka /rapporteur/
Sławomir Wojciechowski
Tamara Dziełakowska /chairperson/

Symbol with description

647 Cases related to personal data protection

Thematic entries

Other

Related references

II SA/Wa 607/20 - Judgment of the Provincial Administrative Court in Warsaw of 2021-01-13

Accused body

Inspector General for Personal Data Protection

Content of the result

Caslation appeal dismissed

Referenced provisions

Journal of Laws 2018, item 2096, art. 7, art. 6, art. 77, art. 80
Act of 14 June 1960 - Code of Administrative Procedure - consolidated text

Journal of Laws 1997 No. 78 item 483 art. 7
Constitution of the Republic of Poland of 2 April 1997 adopted by the National Assembly on 2 April 1997, adopted by the Nation in a constitutional referendum on 25 May 1997, signed by the President of the Republic of Poland on 16 July 1997.
Journal of Laws 2019 item 1145 art. 117, art. 118, art. 119
Act of 23 April 1964 - Civil Code - i.e.
Journal of Laws 2019 item 1115 art. 33, art. 34, art. 49
Act of 1 March 2019 on Counteracting Money Laundering and Terrorist Financing
Journal of Laws 2019, item 351, art. 74, paragraph 2, points 1 and 8
Act of 29 September 1994 on Accounting (consolidated text)
Journal of Laws 2019, item 2325, art. 141, paragraph 4, art. 145, paragraph 1, point 1, letter c
Act of 30 August 2002, the Code of Administrative Court Procedure - consolidated text

Sentence

Supreme Administrative Court, composed of: Presiding Judge of the Supreme Administrative Court Tamara Dziełakowska Judges: Judge of the Supreme Administrative Court Sławomir Wojciechowski Judge del. WSA Hanna Knysiak–Sudyka (rapporteur) Clerk of the Court Assistant to Judge Adam Płusa, having considered on 8 January 2025 at a hearing in the General Administrative Chamber the cassation appeal of Bank \[...\] S.A. in W. against the judgment of the Provincial Administrative Court in Warsaw of 13 January 2021, file reference II SA/Wa 607/20 in the case of the complaint of Bank \[...\] S.A. in W. against the decision of the President of the Personal Data Protection Office of \[...\] January 2020, No. \[...\] regarding the processing of personal data, dismisses the cassation appeal.

Justification

The Provincial Administrative Court in Warsaw, by its judgment of 13 January 2021, file reference II SA/Wa 607/20, dismissed the complaint of Bank \[...\] S.A. with its registered office in W. on the decision of the President of the Personal Data Protection Office of \[...\] January 2020, No. \[...\] regarding the processing of personal data.

The judgment was issued in the following factual and legal circumstances of the case.

On July 9, 2018 (date of receipt by the authority), H. K. and T. K. (hereinafter: "applicants") filed a complaint with the President of the Personal Data Protection Office (hereinafter: "President of the Personal Data Protection Office", "authority") regarding irregularities in the process of processing their personal data by Bank \[...\] Spółka Akcyjna with its registered office in W. (hereinafter: "bank", "applicant"), consisting in the processing of the applicants' personal data without a legal basis and for marketing purposes.

In the content of the complaint, the applicants requested that the bank be prohibited from using, processing and archiving any personal data concerning them.

By the decision of \[...\] January 2020, the President of the Personal Data Protection Office, reference \[...\], acting under Article 104 § 1 of the Act of 14 June 1960 – the Code of Administrative Procedure (Journal of Laws of 2018, item 2096, as amended, hereinafter referred to as: "KPA"), art. 6 sec. 1, art. 21 sec. 3 and art. 58 sec. 2 letters b and l. c Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 April 2016 on the protection of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data, and repealing Directive 95/46/EC (OJ EU L 119 of 04.05.2016, p. 1, as amended, hereinafter referred to as "Regulation 2016/679", "GDPR"), ruled:

in point 1 - on the order for the bank to delete the personal data of applicants, in the scope of their first names, last names, types of identity documents, numbers of identity documents, expiry dates of identity documents, country of issue of identity documents, PESEL identification numbers, dates of birth, places of birth, country of birth, residence statuses, citizenship, parents' first names, marital status, mothers' maiden names, gender, residential address, correspondence address, mobile phone number, home phone number, form of employment and preferred language of contact, data concerning bank products held, CIF numbers (the identification number assigned to bank customers);

in point 2 – on issuing a warning to the bank for violating art. 6 sec. 1, art. 12 sec. 2 and sec. 3, and art. 21 sec. 3 of Regulation 2016/679 consisting in: a) failure to take into account the objection of the applicants expressed in the letter of 23 May 2018 in time, in violation of the provision according to which the controller facilitates the exercise of the rights of the data subject under art. 15-22, b) processing of the personal data of the applicants for marketing purposes without a legal basis, despite the objection raised.

In the justification of the decision, the body indicated the following findings of fact in the case:

In connection with the conclusion of the Personal Account agreement and the Savings Account agreement, the bank obtained the personal data of the applicants in the scope of: first names, last names, type of identity document, identity document number, expiry date of the identity document, country of issue of the identity document, PESEL identification number, date of birth, place of birth, country of birth, statute, residence, citizenship, parents' first names, marital status, mother's maiden name, gender, residential address, correspondence address, mobile phone number, home phone number, form of employment and preferred language of contact, in order to prepare and conclude the above agreements, as well as to implement them.

On 7 April 2017, the applicants submitted to the bank an order to change the type of savings and settlement account from Personal Account to Technical Account. On May 4, 2018, the bank sent the applicants "information on the processing of personal data at Bank \[...\] S.A.", which includes the purposes and deadlines for data processing at the bank.

In a letter dated May 23, 2018, signed by hand by the applicants and containing their names, surnames and addresses, the applicants requested the bank to cease sending advertising materials and bank statements to their address and to withdraw their consent to the processing of their personal data by the bank, which withdrawal of consent included the following: "use, processing and archiving of all our personal data by Bank \[...\] S.A.".

On June 20, 2018, the bank informed the applicants that it had not complied with the request expressed in the letter dated May 23, 2018, due to the impossibility of confirming the identity of the applicants, and also that they could submit the request in person at any bank branch or by sending a request with this content via the bank's hotline or online channel.

The bank also explained that the correspondence received by the applicants consisted of bank statements in connection with the Technical Account and Savings Account maintained for the applicants. In a letter dated 29 June 2018, the applicants refused to use the communication channels indicated to them by the bank in a letter dated 20 June 2018 and reiterated their statement of withdrawal of consent to the processing of their personal data by the bank, calling on the complainant to comply with their request expressed in a letter dated 23 May 2018, quote: "containing an express prohibition on using, processing and archiving my and my spouse's personal data".

On 13 July 2018, the bank, through its employee A. D., in response to letters submitted to the bank by the applicants, contacted the above-mentioned via the mobile phone number provided by the applicants in order to clarify the situation and confirm the identity of the applicants. The applicants refused to conduct a conversation. On 20 July 2018, based on the content of the correspondence with the applicants, the bank closed the applicants' Technical Account and Savings Account and from that date onwards has not processed their personal data for marketing purposes.

On 1 August 2018, the bank sent the applicants a monthly bank statement, and on 3 August 2018 a combined bank statement, which contained information about the bank's subscription to a new structured deposit.

In a letter dated 26 November 2018, the bank stated that it is currently processing applicants' data in the scope of first names, last names, type of identity document, identity document number, identity document expiry date, country of issue of the identity document, PESEL identification number, date of birth, place of birth, country of birth, residence status, citizenship, parents' names, marital status, mother's maiden name, gender, residential address, correspondence address, mobile phone number, home phone number, form of employment and preferred contact language, data on the bank's products, CIF number (identification number assigned to bank customers), on the basis of art. 6 sec. 1 letter f of Regulation 2016/679 of 27 April 2016, i.e. in the legitimate interest pursued by the bank, in order to determine, pursue or defend against potential claims of applicants.

The complainant filed a complaint against the above decision of the President of the Personal Data Protection Office to the Provincial Administrative Court in Warsaw.

In response to the complaint, the authority requested that the complaint be dismissed, raising the same arguments as those presented in the contested decision.

In the documents submitted during the court proceedings, the complainant also requested that additional evidence be taken from documents, i.e.:

1) the decision of the Inspector General for Personal Data Protection (predecessor of the President of the UODO) of \[...\] May 2014, reference number \[...\] regarding the existence of an established practice, different from the position adopted in the contested decision, despite the existence of the same factual and legal circumstances of the case;

2) the decision of the President of the UODO of \[...\] March 2019, reference number \[...\] regarding the existence of an established practice, different from the position adopted in the contested decision, despite the existence of the same factual and legal circumstances of the case;

3) the decision of the President of the UODO of September 2020, reference number \[...\] (not published, obtained through access to public information, the date of issue was removed by the authority).

The Provincial Administrative Court in Warsaw, in the above-mentioned judgment, dismissed the complaint of Bank \[...\] S.A. with its registered office in W., finding that the contested decision had been issued in accordance with the law.

In justifying its position, the Court of First Instance indicated that the Court's findings clearly showed that during the proceedings conducted by the body, the complainant did not indicate that it had processed the personal data of the applicants on a basis other than that specified in art. 6 sec. 1 letter f) of Regulation 2016/679, i.e. in order to protect its interests in the event of potential claims by the applicants.

The Provincial Administrative Court in Warsaw found that the factual circumstances of this case had been established correctly by the President of the UODO. During the conducted administrative proceedings, there was no violation of art. 7, art. 77 and art. 80 of the Code of Administrative Procedure referred to in the complaint. The authority conducted the explanatory proceedings required by law, sufficient to establish the circumstances of fundamental importance for resolving the case and to assess whether the conditions for issuing a decision provided for by law were met. The court of first instance emphasised that, in accordance with the principle expressed in Article 80 of the Code of Administrative Procedure, the authority conducting the proceedings, based on its knowledge, experience and internal conviction, assesses the probative value of individual evidence, the impact of proving one circumstance on other circumstances. When assessing the results of the evidentiary proceedings (reliability and strength of evidence), the authority should take into account the content of all evidence conducted and considered, indicating in the justification of the decision the facts it considered proven, the evidence on which it relied and the reasons for which it denied the credibility and probative value of other evidence. The analysis of the justification of the contested decision leads to the assumption that the President of the UODO complied with the above obligations and did not violate the rules of free evaluation of evidence. The court of first instance considered that it should also be noted that before issuing the contested decision, in accordance with the provisions of the Code of Administrative Procedure applicable in this respect, the body informed the complainant (letter of 31 May 2019) about the content of Article 10 § 1 of the Code of Administrative Procedure, i.e. about the collection of evidence sufficient to issue a decision, to which the complainant did not react and did not indicate any other grounds for processing the applicants' personal data than the previously raised ones. The court of first instance found that in a situation where the applicants – following the applicant's letter of 4 May 2018 "information regarding the processing of personal data (...)", submitted a letter of 23 May 2018 in which they requested the bank to stop sending advertising materials and bank statements to their address and included a written declaration of withdrawal of consent to the processing of their personal data by the bank, which withdrawal of consent included: "use, processing and archiving of all our personal data (...)", the bank had no legal basis for the legal processing of their personal data. Ultimately, the bank closed the applicants' savings and technical account, in accordance with their request, on 20 July 2019.

The Provincial Administrative Court in Warsaw found that the bank indicated the protection of its interests in the event of the applicants pursuing any claims as the basis for the current processing of the applicants' personal data. However, the evidence collected by the authority during the administrative proceedings did not show that the applicants had made any claim against the bank that would entitle the bank to retain and process their personal data for evidentiary purposes in connection with their pursuit of that claim. The authority was therefore right to find that the premise indicated by the bank of necessity for the purposes resulting from the legally justified interests pursued by the administrator in relation to the processing of the contested personal data was not met. The premise of art. 6 sec. 1 letter f of Regulation 2016/679 concerns an existing situation, in which the purpose resulting from the legally justified interests pursued by the administrator is the need to prove, pursue or defend against an existing claim, and not a situation where the data is processed in order to secure against a potential claim.

In the Court's opinion, the basis indicated by the bank does not justify the processing of the applicants' personal data, because they did not make any claim against the bank. Thus, the processing of their personal data is not based on legal provisions and is not necessary for the fulfilment of legally justified purposes pursued by the bank, in particular to defend against potential complaints or claims for damages. However, if (hypothetically) the applicants filed claims with a common court, they would have to provide all their personal data necessary for conducting the proceedings, specified in the Code of Civil Procedure. The bank, as a hypothetical defendant, would then have full access to them.

In light of the above considerations, the objection raised in the complaint regarding the violation of art. 6 point 1 letter f of Regulation 2016/679 in conjunction with art. 117 § 2 and § 21, art. 118 and art. 119 of the Act of 23 April 1964 - the Civil Code (Journal of Laws of 2019, item 1145, as amended, hereinafter referred to as: "Civil Code"), because, as presented above, the President of the UODO correctly concluded that the basis for the processing of personal data specified in this provision did not occur in this case.

According to the Court of First Instance, the complaint's allegation of infringement by the authority of Art. 8 of the Code of Administrative Procedure is also unfounded, because the decisions presented by the complainant during the court proceedings were issued in factual circumstances other than those established in the case.

Taking into account the circumstances cited, the Voivodship Administrative Court in Warsaw, acting under Art. 151 of the Act of 30 August 2002 - the Code of Administrative Court Procedure (Journal of Laws of 2019, item 2325, as amended, hereinafter referred to as: "p.p.s.a."), ruled to dismiss the complaint.

A cassation appeal against this judgment was filed by Bank \[...\] S.A. with its registered office in W., appealing against the judgment in its entirety and accusing it of:

1. pursuant to art. 174 item 1 of the p.p.s.a. violation of substantive law, i.e.:

1) art. 7 of the Code of Administrative Procedure in connection with art. 6 of the Code of Administrative Procedure and art. 7 of the Constitution of the Republic of Poland (hereinafter "Constitution of the Republic of Poland") through an erroneous interpretation of art. 7 of the Code of Administrative Procedure consisting in the recognition by the Provincial Administrative Court that the explanation of the factual circumstances by the authority includes determining the legal basis for processing data resulting from generally applicable provisions of law. Determining the rights and obligations of the parties is the authority's obligation resulting from the principle of the rule of law and does not constitute an element of determining the factual circumstances;

2) art. 17 sec. 3 lit. b) and e) of the GDPR through its improper application, consisting in the failure of the Administrative Court to take into account the fact that the complainant has a statutory obligation to process Mr. and Mrs. K.'s data after the end of the contract, and in particular that this data is necessary to establish, pursue or defend claims;

3) Art. 6 sec. 1 letter f of the GDPR in connection with Art. 117, 118 and 119 of the Civil Code consisting in an erroneous interpretation through the Administrative Court's recognition that storing data for the limitation period for claims, also in the event that neither the controller nor the data subject has filed a claim, does not constitute a legitimate interest of the bank within the meaning of Art. 6 sec. 1 letter f of the GDPR;

4) Art. 6 sec. 1 letter c) of the GDPR in connection with Art. 5 sec. 1, Art. 6 and Art. 9 of the Act of 5 August 2015 on the handling of complaints by financial market entities and on the Financial Ombudsman (Journal of Laws of 2019, item 2279, hereinafter referred to as the "Act on the handling of complaints by financial market entities") consisting in its improper application and the assumption that the bank, as a financial market entity, is not subject to specific obligations in the scope of handling and responding without time limits to customer complaints, which entitles the cassation complainant to process the personal data of Mr. and Mrs. K. on the basis of Art. 6 sec. 1 letter c) of the GDPR in order to fulfil these obligations;

5) Art. 6 sec. 1 letter c of the GDPR in connection with Art. 33, 34 and 49 of the Act of 1 March 2018 on Counteracting Money Laundering and Terrorist Financing ("AML Act"), consisting in its incorrect application and the assumption by the Provincial Administrative Court that the cassation appellant does not have a basis for processing data resulting from art. 6 sec. 1 letter c of the GDPR in connection with art. 33, 34 and 49 of the AML Act, while these provisions impose on the cassation appellant an obligation to process personal data for 5 years from the first day of the year following the year in which the business relationship with the client was terminated for the purposes of counteracting money laundering;

6) art. 6 sec. 1 letter c of the GDPR in connection with art. 74 sec. 2 points 1 and 8 of the Act of 29 September 1994 on Accounting (Journal of Laws of 2019, item 351, hereinafter referred to as the "Accounting Act") consisting in its incorrect application and the assumption by the Provincial Administrative Court that the cassation appellant does not have a premise for data processing resulting from art. 6 sec. 1 letter c of the GDPR in connection with art. 74 sec. 2 points 1 and 8 of the Accounting Act, while these provisions impose on the cassation appellant an obligation to process personal data for 5 years for accounting purposes.

II. On the basis of art. 174 point 2 of the p.p.s.a. violation of the provisions of the procedure having a significant impact on the outcome of the case, i.e.:

7) art. 141 § 4 of the p.p.s.a. by completely omitting the allegations raised in the complaint and in the supplementary letter regarding the violation of the provisions of the Act on the handling of complaints by financial market entities, the AML Act, the Accounting Act and Article 8 § 2 of the Code of Administrative Procedure;

8) Article 145 § 1 item 1 letter c) of the Code of Administrative Procedure in connection with Articles 7, 77 and 80 of the Code of Administrative Procedure by not annulling the decision in its entirety despite the fact that the body did not consider the facts of the case in their entirety.

Taking the above into account, the appellant filed a cassation appeal to annul the contested judgment in its entirety, to consider the complaint and to annul the decision of the President of the Personal Data Protection Office of \[...\] January 2020, reference number \[...\] in its entirety, or to annul the contested judgment in its entirety and refer the case for reconsideration to the Voivodship Administrative Court in Warsaw. At the same time, the bank requested that the costs of the proceedings be awarded in accordance with the applicable rules, as well as that the case covered by this cassation appeal be examined at a hearing.

The above allegations were developed in the justification of the cassation appeal.

In response to the cassation appeal, the President of the Personal Data Protection Office requested its dismissal.

In the procedural letter of 13 July 2021, Bank \[...\] S.A. with its registered office in W. presented its position on the response of the President of the Personal Data Protection Office of 12 April 2021.

In the procedural letter of 17 August 2021 entitled "Rejoinder", the President of the Personal Data Protection Office maintained the position expressed in the above-mentioned response to the cassation appeal.

The Supreme Administrative Court considered the following:

Pursuant to art. 183 § 1 of the Act of 30 August 2002 - The Code of Administrative Court Procedure (consolidated text: Journal of Laws of 2024, item 935; hereinafter referred to as "p.p.s.a."), the Supreme Administrative Court examines the case within the limits of the cassation appeal, but takes into account the invalidity of the proceedings ex officio. In the case, there are no grounds for invalidity of the administrative court proceedings, enumerated in art. 183 § 2 of the p.p.s.a. For this reason, when examining the case, the Supreme Administrative Court was bound by the limits of the cassation appeal.

A cassation appeal may be based on the following grounds:

1) violation of substantive law through its incorrect interpretation or incorrect application;

2) violation of the provisions of the procedure, if this failure could have a significant impact on the outcome of the case (art. 174 of the p.p.s.a.).

The limits of a cassation appeal are determined by the grounds indicated therein. This means that the reasons cited in the cassation appeal for the legal defect of the contested judgment determine the scope of review by the second-instance court, which, unlike the first-instance court, does not examine the entirety of the case, but only verifies the validity of the allegations raised in the cassation appeal.

In a situation where a cassation appeal alleges a violation of substantive law and a violation of procedural provisions, as a rule, allegations of a violation of procedural provisions are examined first, because only after determining that the factual state of affairs accepted by the court in the contested judgment is correct or has not been sufficiently challenged can one proceed to review the process of subsuming a given factual state under the provision of substantive law applied by the court of first instance (see judgment of the Supreme Administrative Court of 27 June 2012, file reference II GSK 819/11, Lex No. 1217424; judgment of the Supreme Administrative Court of 26 March 2010, file reference II FSK 1842/08, Lex No. 596025; judgment of the Supreme Administrative Court of 4 June 2014, file reference II GSK 402/13, Lex No. 1488113).

Referring to the most far-reaching allegation of a violation of Article 141 § 4 p.p.s.a. it should be pointed out that it is unjustified. On this basis, the completeness of the elements of the justification may be questioned, but not its substantive correctness. It should be emphasized that the court of first instance is not obliged to refer in detail to all the claims raised in the complaint. The justification of the judgment should be drafted in such a way that it results from it why the court found the contested judgment to be lawful or unlawful, why it did not find or found in the case under consideration that the administrative authorities had violated the provisions of substantive law or the provisions of procedure to an extent that could have affected the content of the decision (see the judgment of the Supreme Administrative Court of 4 January 2011, file reference II OSK 1985/09). Any defectiveness of the argumentation or presentation by the party of a view other than that indicated in the justification does not constitute a violation by the court of art. 141 § 4 p.p.s.a. The justification of the judgment appealed in this case was prepared in a way that allows familiarization with the position of the Court of first instance, and also contains all the elements listed in this provision. The polemic with the substantive position of the court of first instance cannot be reduced to an accusation of violation of art. 141 § 4 p.p.s.a., by which one cannot effectively combat either the correctness of the factual circumstances adopted as the basis for the ruling, or the court's position on the interpretation or application of the law (see judgment of the Supreme Administrative Court of 26 November 2014, reference number II OSK 1131/13; judgment of the Supreme Administrative Court of 20 January 2015, reference number I FSK 2081/13; judgment of the Supreme Administrative Court of 12 March 2015, reference number I OSK 2338/13; judgment of the Supreme Administrative Court of 18 March 2015, reference number I GSK 1779/13, judgment of the Supreme Administrative Court of 10 April 2018, reference number II GSK 1995/16).

In relation to the allegation of violation of art. 145 § 1 item 1 letter c p.p.s.a. in connection with art. 7, 77 and 80 of the Code of Administrative Procedure, it should be noted first of all that the construction of the objection is defective. The court of first instance dismissed the complaint, thus ruling on the basis of art. 151 of the p.p.s.a., and not on the basis of art. 145 § 1 item 1 letter c of the p.p.s.a. indicated in this basis for cassation. Moreover, art. 77 of the Code of Administrative Procedure consists of four paragraphs with different normative content, and the appellant in cassation did not indicate which of them he alleged a violation of, which was his obligation. The basis for cassation should be understood as a specific provision of law, the infringement of which is alleged by the court of first instance in the cassation appeal, and in relation to a provision that does not constitute one closed whole, but consists of paragraphs, points and other editorial units, the requirement of an effectively filed cassation appeal is met when it indicates a specific provision violated by the court of first instance, with the number of the article, paragraph, point and possibly another editorial unit of the provision.

The above objection comes down to failure to consider the factual circumstances of the case in their entirety. It should be noted that in the administrative proceedings, all evidence known to the authority was conducted and assessed within the framework of the free evaluation of evidence. Before issuing the contested decision, the authority informed the cassation appealing party about the evidence collected, but the appealing party did not indicate other evidence, nor did it indicate the grounds for processing the personal data of the applicants other than those indicated up to that point.

It should be noted that in accordance with the principle of objective truth, which has been constructed in art. 7 of the Code of Administrative Procedure, during the proceedings, public administration bodies shall, ex officio or at the request of the parties, take all necessary actions to thoroughly explain the factual circumstances and to settle the case. The public administration body is therefore obliged to collect and consider the evidence in such a way as to establish the factual circumstances of the case in accordance with reality. The principle of objective truth has been specified in art. 77 § 1 of the Code of Administrative Procedure, according to which "the public administration body is obliged to exhaustively collect and consider all the evidence". In turn, according to art. 80 of the Code of Administrative Procedure, "the public administration body assesses, on the basis of the entirety of the evidence, whether a given circumstance has been proven". Taking into account the content of the provisions cited above, it should be recognized that the principle of official evidentiary proceedings applies in administrative proceedings. The circumstance in which the party also has the right to demonstrate the initiative to bring evidence does not release the public administration body from the obligation to take ex officio actions aimed at fully explaining the factual circumstances and to settle the case. The public administration body is obliged ex officio to:

1. determine what factual circumstances are significant for resolving the case;

2. determine what evidence should be taken in order to determine the above circumstances;

3. take evidence that it considers necessary to make correct findings regarding the factual circumstances of the case;

4. assess the evidence taken in accordance with the principle of free evaluation of evidence (cf. judgment of the Supreme Administrative Court of 23 February 2012, II GSK 118/12, LEX No. 1125454).

Fulfilment of the above obligations by the public administration body does not of course deprive the party of the right to actively participate in the evidentiary proceedings related to the implementation of the principle of the party's active participation in the proceedings. The party's right to actively participate in each stage of the proceedings is exercised in particular by the right to initiate evidence, as set out in Article 78 of the Code of Administrative Procedure, the right to take an active part in the evidentiary proceedings (Art. 79 of the Code of Administrative Procedure), as well as the right to express one's opinion on the evidence taken, resulting from Art. 10 § 1 and Art. 81 of the Code of Administrative Procedure.

The principle of objective truth is related to the issue of the distribution of the burden of proof (onus probandi) in administrative proceedings. The principle of objective truth transfers the burden of proof in administrative proceedings to the public administration body conducting the proceedings in the case. As a rule, the host of the administrative proceedings is the public administration body, which should conduct them in accordance with the principle of officialdom, however, the party has the right to actively participate in the explanatory proceedings, and in particular the right to initiate evidence, which it should use in order to avoid negative consequences related to the findings made by the body regarding the factual circumstances of the case on the basis of evidence known to the body.

The above position is well illustrated by the judgment of 8 November 2013, II OSK 1291/12, in which the Supreme Administrative Court stated that "the body is indeed obliged to exhaustively collect and consider all evidence, but the party is not exempt from loyal cooperation in explaining the factual circumstances. It should present all information necessary to establish the factual circumstances of the case, as well as provide evidence in its possession or which only it can present, confirming the circumstances indicated in the justification of the application initiating the proceedings. These obligations do not in any way exclude the requirement for the administrative body to strive to clarify the material truth (Art. 7 and 77 § 1 of the Code of Administrative Procedure), however, they mean that the person filing the application should actively cooperate with the body in order to establish all the circumstances of the case. In cases in which the party did not present, and the body did not find ex officio, evidence confirming the facts and events from which the party derives specific (usually favourable) legal consequences for itself, before issuing a decision In the event of a negative decision, the administrative body should always call upon the party to supplement the evidence by presenting the missing evidence or clarifying any unclear or general explanations provided so far."

It should therefore be recognized that "the obligations of public administration bodies to take evidence ex officio in order to reconstruct the objective truth do not go so far as to release the party from participating in the collection of evidence" (judgment of the Supreme Administrative Court of 17 February 2011, II GSK 273/10, LEX No. 992347; see also judgment of the Supreme Administrative Court of 7 December 2010, II OSK 1677/10, LEX No. 746724). In particular, when the public administration body has made certain findings regarding the factual situation based on the evidence taken, and the party questions this evidence and findings, counter-evidence may be taken at its initiative, but the body is not obliged to seek evidence to prove the correctness of the party's position (see judgment of the Supreme Administrative Court of 10 December 2009, II OSK 1933/08, LEX No. 582865).

It should be emphasized that in administrative proceedings concerning the lawfulness of personal data processing, the issue of whether the administrator processes personal data correctly and in accordance with the provisions on personal data protection is examined. The regulation of art. 5 sec. 1 and 2 GDPR According to the above provision: "1. Personal data must be:

a) processed lawfully, fairly and in a transparent manner for the data subject ("lawfulness, fairness and transparency");

b) collected for specific, explicit and legitimate purposes and not further processed in a manner incompatible with those purposes; further processing for archiving purposes in the public interest, scientific or historical research purposes or statistical purposes is not considered incompatible with the original purposes under Article 89 paragraph 1 ("purpose limitation");

c) adequate, relevant and limited to what is necessary for the purposes for which they are processed ("data minimization");

d) accurate and, where necessary, kept up to date; all reasonable steps must be taken to ensure that personal data that are incorrect in light of the purposes of their processing are promptly deleted or rectified ("accuracy");

e) stored in a form which enables the identification of the data subject for a period not longer than than is necessary for the purposes for which the personal data are processed; personal data may be stored for longer, provided that they are processed solely for archiving purposes in the public interest, scientific or historical research purposes or statistical purposes pursuant to Article 89(1), provided that appropriate technical and organisational measures required by this Regulation to protect the rights and freedoms of data subjects are implemented ("storage limitation");

(f) processed in a way that ensures appropriate security of the personal data, including protection against unauthorised or unlawful processing and accidental loss, destruction or damage, using appropriate technical or organisational measures ("integrity and confidentiality").

2. The controller shall be responsible for and be able to demonstrate compliance with the provisions of paragraph 1 ("accountability").

In accordance with the principle of accountability (Article 5, paragraph 2 of the GDPR), it is the data controller's responsibility to demonstrate that both the scope and method of processing personal data are adequate to the purpose chosen by them and the conditions for its implementation - the principle of limited processing purpose (Article 5, paragraph 1, letter b of the GDPR) and the principle of minimizing data processing (Article 5, paragraph 1, letter c of the GDPR). The above determines the unfoundedness of the raised allegation of violation of the provisions of the procedure by failing to consider the factual circumstances of the case in full. For the same reasons, the allegation of violation of Article 7 of the Code of Administrative Procedure and Article 6 of the Code of Administrative Procedure and Article 7 of the Constitution of the Republic of Poland is unfounded.

The remaining allegations of violation of substantive law raised in the cassation appeal are also unfounded.

In particular, the allegation of violation of Article 17, paragraph 3, letters b and e of the GDPR and Article 6, paragraph 1, letter f of the GDPR in conjunction with Article is unfounded. 117, 118 and 119 of the Civil Code. Article 17 of the GDPR, regulating the right "to be forgotten", indicates that paragraphs 1 and 2 of this provision do not apply to the extent that processing is necessary for the performance of a legal obligation requiring processing under EU law or the law of a Member State to which the controller is subject or for the performance of a task carried out in the public interest or in the exercise of official authority vested in the controller and for the establishment, pursuit or defense of claims. The position of the Court of First Instance that it is inadmissible to process personal data "for now" with the assumption that they may be useful in the future and with reference to the provisions on the limitation of civil claims is correct.

In accordance with the provisions of Article 6 paragraph 1 GDPR "\[p\]rocessing is lawful only in cases where - and to the extent that - at least one of the following conditions is met - letter f - processing is necessary for the purposes of the legitimate interests pursued by the controller or by a third party, except where the interests or fundamental rights and freedoms of the data subject, requiring protection of personal data, override those interests, in particular when the data subject is a child".

The application of art. 6 sec. 1 letter f of the GDPR is therefore justified when the following conditions are met:

1) there are purposes on the part of the controller for the achievement of which the processing of personal data is necessary;

2) these purposes result from "legitimate interests" pursued by the controller;

3) "legitimate interests" pursued by the controller override the interests or fundamental rights and freedoms of the person whose data is being processed.

The purpose for which the processing of personal data is necessary should be understood as the state of affairs, the arrangement of reality, which the administrator strives for through this processing. The "necessity" of processing personal data to achieve the purpose chosen by the administrator comes down to establishing that it cannot be achieved without this processing. It is therefore about demonstrating a logically justified and verifiable cause-and-effect relationship between the processing of personal data and the realization of the state of affairs, which the administrator strives for. Determining the "necessity" of processing personal data for the purposes of the administrator must be based on specific premises, taking into account the widest possible spectrum of conditions for its implementation. The processing of personal data on the basis of art. 6 sec. 1 letter f of the GDPR requires the administrator to demonstrate that it is necessary due to the nature of the purpose, the factual and legal circumstances of its implementation and the subjective relations between the administrator and the person to whom the data relates. In accordance with the principle of accountability (Article 5, paragraph 2 of the GDPR), the controller will be required to demonstrate that both the scope and manner of processing personal data are adequate to the purpose chosen by the controller and the conditions for its implementation - the principle of limited processing purpose (Article 5, paragraph 1, letter b of the GDPR) and the principle of minimizing processed data (Article 5, paragraph 1, letter c of the GDPR).

Another condition for processing personal data under Article 6, paragraph 1, letter f of the GDPR is to establish that the purpose for which such processing is necessary "results from the legitimate interests pursued by the controller (or by a third party)". The designations of "legitimate interests of the controller" are not only those interests that are closely related to the implementation of rights and obligations arising from legal provisions. Such a narrow understanding of this concept would lead to partial duplication of the premise of personal data processing from Article 6, paragraph 1, letter f with the premise specified in Article 6, paragraph 1, letter c of the GDPR; Article 6, paragraph 1 letter c GDPR legitimizes the processing of personal data if it is "necessary for the fulfilment of a legal obligation to which the controller is subject". A legitimate interest of the controller should therefore be understood as a legally permitted interest that is not contrary to the legal order.

The EU legislator referred to the legitimate interests of the controller of personal data in recital 47 of the preamble to the GDPR, in which it stated that "\[s\]uch a legitimate interest may exist, for example, in cases where there is a relevant and appropriate type of connection between the data subject and the controller, for example where the data subject is a client of the controller or acts on its behalf. In order to establish the existence of a legitimate interest, a thorough assessment would have to be carried out in each case, including an assessment of whether, at the time and in the context in which the personal data are collected, the data subject has reasonable grounds to expect that processing for that purpose may take place".

The content of recital 47 of the GDPR recitals does not therefore indicate specifically, in a matrix, what conditions should be met in order to conclude that the controller processes personal data in accordance with its legitimate interests. It is only given, by way of example, that this may involve a special type of relationship between the controller and the data subject. In each specific situation, it must be decided whether the content and nature of this relationship reasonably justifies such processing within a specific scope and time. It should be emphasized that in recital 47, the EU legislator did not at all link the "legitimate interests" of the controller with the legal order. Instead, it placed emphasis on the nature of the relationship between the controller and the data subject, its context and the reasonable need for such processing resulting from their individual circumstances. Recital 47 of the GDPR recitals in the context of reconstructing the scope of application of art. 6 sec. 1 lit. f GDPR determines that the admissibility of processing personal data on this basis should be assessed causally, taking into account that the conditions of the specific relationship between the controller and the person whose data is being processed should be of fundamental importance in this matter. The legal order - in this space of formulating assessments - should be treated as the limit of the admissibility of the legitimate interest of the controller, on which the processing of personal data is based. The legal order may therefore be an obstacle to the processing of personal data on the basis of art. 6 sec. 1 letter f GDPR, if the controller's interest cannot be reconciled with it - the controller's interest will be contrary to the legal order, and therefore will not be legally justified. The legal order does not constitute a strict basis for the controller's legitimate interest in processing personal data on the basis of art. 6 sec. 1 letter f GDPR, but it does set the limit of this processing.

In the above context, it should be noted that in the factual circumstances of this case, the appellants indicated in the cassation appeal the protection of their interests in the event of the applicants pursuing any claims, while it has not been proven that the applicants filed any claim against the appellants in the cassation appeal. Moreover, the applicants ceased to be customers of the bank due to the closure of their savings and technical account on 20 July 2019.

In relation to the allegation of violation of art. 6 sec. 1 letter c of the GDPR in connection with art. 5 sec. 1, art. 6 and art. 9 of the Act of 5 August 2015 on the consideration of complaints by financial market entities and on the Financial Ombudsman (consolidated text: Journal of Laws of 2024, item 1109), it should be noted that the above regulations cannot constitute a basis for the indefinite processing of personal data, especially of those persons who are no longer customers of the bank. If the above regulations were to be read differently, the right to be forgotten would be a fiction. Moreover, the administrator did not invoke such a basis for the processing of personal data in the administrative proceedings.

The allegation of violation of art. 6 sec. 1 letter c of the GDPR in connection with art. 33, 34 and 49 of the Act of 1 March 2018 on counteracting money laundering and terrorism financing (consolidated text, Journal of Laws of 2023, item 1124) is also unfounded. First of all, this allegation was incorrectly constructed, because art. 33, 34 and 49 of the Act on counteracting money laundering and terrorism financing consist of many editorial units with different normative content, and the appellant in the cassation appeal did not indicate which of them he alleges a violation, which was his obligation. In this situation, the Court of Appeal cannot guess the intention of the author of the cassation appeal.

On the sidelines, it is also worth emphasizing that during the administrative proceedings, the cassation complainant did not specifically indicate which legal regulations of the above act constitute the basis for processing the personal data of the applicants.

In relation to the allegation of violation of art. 6 sec. 1 letter c of the GDPR in connection with art. 74 sec. 2 points 1 and 8 of the Act of 29 September 1994 on accounting (consolidated text: Journal of Laws of 2023, item 120), it should also be noted that during the administrative proceedings, the cassation complainant did not raise the above circumstance as justifying the processing of the personal data of the applicants. It is necessary to refer here once again to the principle of accountability resulting from art. 5 sec. 2 of the GDPR and its consequences. The statement that the controller should be able to demonstrate compliance with the principles should be read as imposing on the controller the burden of proof in terms of compliance with the principles of data processing. In the event of a dispute with the data subject or with the supervisory authority, the controller should be able to provide evidence that it complies with the principles. In these proceedings, the cassation complainant did not demonstrate the admissibility of processing personal data in the event of the applicants withdrawing their consent to their processing.

For these reasons, on the basis of Article 184 of the Personal Data Protection Act, the Supreme Administrative Court dismissed the cassation appeal due to the lack of justified grounds.
