10/13/2021
                        The Administrative Court of the Republic of Slovenia (court) upheld the decision of the Information Commissioner (IP) that an individual cannot invoke the erasure of his personal data from a baptismal certificate by invoking the right to erasure from Article 17 of the General Regulation (right to be forgotten). Roman Catholic Church (RCC). & # 13;
In the specific case, the individual requested the deletion of all his personal data from the RKC baptismal register. The latter allegedly kept his personal data in the baptismal certificate illegally, as he himself had never consented to such processing of his personal data or had unequivocally revoked such consent (given to him by his parents) (Article 17/1 / b and d). & # 13;
RKC as the manager rejected this request of the individual. An appeal against the RCC's decision was decided by the IP, who first had to determine whether any of the circumstances referred to in Article 17/3 of the General Regulation were present, which completely excluded the application of the first paragraph and limited the individual's right to erasure or oblivion. According to the findings of the IP, which were also confirmed by the Court, the keeping of personal data in the RCC baptismal registers is a case of processing under Article 17/3 / d of the General Regulation, ie. for processing required for archiving purposes in the public interest. That provision of the General Regulation, moreover, imposes an additional condition for the application of that restriction on the right to erasure, namely that such a restriction applies if the right to erasure could impede or seriously impede the pursuit of the purposes of that processing. IP and the court did not have to determine the fulfillment of this condition, as the issue has already been resolved by the legislator in the first paragraph of Article 52 of the Protection of Documentary and Archival Materials and Archives Act (Official Gazette of the RS, nos. 30/06 and 51/14; ZVDAGA). This stipulates that RKC material has the characteristics of archival material under this Act, and is subject to the principles of permanence and integrity. The test of proportionality between the right to the processing of personal data for the purposes of archiving in the public interest and the interference with the individual's right to information privacy has therefore already been performed by the legislator. Therefore, the IP rejected the individual's appeal against the RCC's decision, as the conditions for the deletion of personal data under Article 17 of the General Regulation are not met. The court upheld the IP's decision and dismissed the individual's lawsuit against his decision. & # 13;
The court also noted in the decision that the storage of personal data of an individual in the baptismal register is not, by its very nature, a case where the plaintiff perceives the confession or exercise of religion, which would mean such a forced confrontation with a religious belief. his religious freedom. By bare storage of his personal data in the baptismal certificate, the individual is not forcibly confronted with religious elements or forced to participate in the exercise of religion. it in itself represents respect for his right not to belong to any religion.
