2020 May. after the temporary suspension of the use of the Quarantine app, in 2021. February. Following an investigation carried out by the State Data Protection Inspectorate (SDPI), fines were imposed on the National Center for Public Health (NVSC) and UAB IT Solutions Success (the Company), which developed the app, for violations of the General Data Protection Regulation (BDAR).

NVSC 12 thousand. a fine has been imposed for infringements of Articles 5, 13, 24, 32, 35 and 58 (2) (f) of the BDAR. The company has 3 thousand. a fine was imposed for the established violations of Articles 5, 13, 24, 32 and 35 of the BDAR.

2020 In the spring of 2006, the SDPI started monitoring activities in response to information in the media about the possible improper processing of personal data by the Quarantine program. After evaluating the initial information, it was decided to open an investigation and temporarily suspend the processing of personal data by the app.

The study found that when the app became operational in 2020, in April data from 677 individuals were collected. Not all personal data was collected to the same extent, but the app provides processing of personal data such as identification number, latitude and longitude coordinates, country, city, municipality, postal code, street name, house number, name, surname, personal code, telephone number, address, 2nd address, whether the place of residence is declared in Lithuania and other information. According to the submitted data, it was established that the processing of the app data was performed not only in the territory of Lithuania, but also in Europe (Estonia, Switzerland, etc.) and abroad (India, USA, etc.).

After conducting an investigation, the SDPI found that both NVSC and the Company are joint data controllers, although both organizations denied such status.

When deciding on the imposition and amount of the administrative fine, VDAI took into account the fact that NVSC and the Company processed personal data intentionally, to a large extent, illegally, systematically, without providing technical and organizational means to prove compliance with BDAR requirements. , special categories of personal data were processed. In addition, the Company did not comply with the instruction given to it by VDAI to suspend the processing of personal data collected with the help of the app and deleted part of the personal data.

The decision of the SDPI may be appealed to a court within one month from the date of its service in accordance with the procedure established by legal acts.

 

More research information

Data Protection Impact Assessment (DPA). Following an investigation, the SDPI found that a data protection impact assessment (PDAV) had to be carried out in order to process the data. Article 35 (1) of the BDAR provides that in cases where the nature of the processing, in particular the use of new technologies, and the nature, scope, context and purposes of the processing, the rights and freedoms of natural persons may be seriously jeopardized, , performs PDAV of the planned data processing operations before starting the data processing.

The processing of personal data by the app is considered as processing using a new technology, as well as as a systematic monitoring, as in this case the processing is carried out by data subjects using the app for self-isolation monitoring and control. Also, with the help of the app it was planned to process a large number of personal data of data subjects in the whole territory of Lithuania and abroad. In addition, according to the information collected during the VDAI investigation, it can be concluded that the processing of personal data was planned to be carried out on a continuous basis. Persons identified as vulnerable, ie patients, children, the elderly, etc., were treated. personal data, including but not limited to health data.

Among other things, in the opinion of VDAI, NVSC managed state information resources by performing the function of prevention and control of communicable diseases and processing personal data collected by the app, and violated the requirements of Articles 24 and 32 of the BDAR. on the implementation of appropriate organizational measures and the principle of integrity and confidentiality provided for in Article 5 (1) (f) BDAR (personal data must be processed in such a way as to ensure adequate security of personal data by appropriate technical or organizational measures, accidental loss, destruction or damage).

Violated principles. Taking into account that NVSC and the Company have not proved the lawfulness of the processing of personal data carried out by the app, VDAI established a violation of the principle of lawfulness provided for in Article 5 (1) of the BDAR. As neither NVSC nor the Company acknowledged that they were data controllers during the inspection, both denied their liability as data controllers and accordingly did not implement the accountability principle set out in Article 5 (2) of the BDAR. The gadget's privacy policy also violated the principle of transparency by providing incorrect information about data controllers and processors.

Failure to comply with the order. During the inspection of personal data processed by the app, it was important for VDAI to assess the actual scope and nature of personal data processing, therefore VDAI instructed the Company to temporarily suspend the processing of personal data through the app, but the Company deleted the data. By deleting the personal data processed by the app, the company did not properly implement the instruction given to it by VDAI and thus violated Article 58 (2) (f) of the BDAR. It should be noted that such non-compliance with the instructions of VDAI incurs the Company's liability provided for in Article 83 (5) (e) of the BDAR.
